nf1167: i told you last time because i didn't finish the lecture on Rawls and 
utilitarianism that i was going to finish it today but actually i've decided 
i'm not going to i know you'll be very disappointed but think you've had enough 
of that so i'm going straight into er Nozick and his criticisms of Rawls er so 
just a few years after Rawls published his book er another one of the Harvard 
Philosophy department er published er a very sort of radical libertarian tract 
called Anarchy State and Utopia er this was Robert Nozick it was very 
provocative and it got lots of attention er favourable and unfavourable he 
started his book this way individuals have rights and there are things no 
person or group may do to them without violating their rights so strong and far-
reaching are these rights that they raise the question of what if anything the 
state and its officials may do so that's where that's his starting point he 
doesn't 
even argue for that that's where he gets off so he argued that only a minimal 
state was justified and anything more extensive than that violated people's 
rights all that this minimal state could do was protect people against force 
theft fraud and forced contracts and a few things like that but it didn't have 
any welfare functions he also had a long chapter criticizing Rawls and the 
whole approach to distributive justice that he regarded Rawls as representative 
of now his own approach to justice he calls the entitlement theory he avoids 
the very term distributive justice he doesn't think that justice consists of 
distributing anything at all he d-, he doesn't like that whole approach er as 
we'll see now er you'll find that Nozick writes in a very sort of loose style 
it's very readable but a lot of it is a matter of sort of shooting from the hip 
and he sort of scatters his shots all over the place and a lot of them sort of 
miss a lot of them it's a lot of 
good rhetoric but a lot of his his shots really don't hit their targets so er 
i'm not going to have a lot to say about his own positive theory today we're 
going to focus mostly on his criticisms of er Rawls' theory and related 
theories well i'll say a l-, a little about his theories so you'll have some 
idea of what his own view is his own entitlement view of justice begins with 
the proposition that people have inviolable rights of self-ownership so that 
means in effect that people have rights over themselves that are equivalent to 
the rights that a slave owner would have over his slave so they're entitled to 
use their own body and their own products in a way that a slave over er slave 
owner would be entitled to use his slave's body and the products of the slave's 
labour so as a result of that people are entitled to make certain 
choices and as long as the starting point from which they make their choices is 
just whatever follows by just steps is just you just let the process follow let 
it lead where it may it doesn't really matter you don't even have to keep track 
of the distribution er that you get to so what he cares about is the history or 
pedigree of people's holdings he doesn't care about what the overall pattern 
that they add up to is [sniff] so it's a historical entitlement view no general 
redistribution is called for er he says now he specifies three things that are 
required for this process to be just first there has to be justice in the 
original acquisition of holdings second there has to be justice in the transfer 
of holdings from one person to another and third there has to be rectification 
of any past injustices that might have occurred [sniff] of course er the big 
question here is what is it for ju-, for 
acquisitions to be just in the first place and an important point that Nozick 
makes here is what he calls the Lockean proviso er because h-, he's it's 
closely related to a point that John Locke made this says that there's an 
important constraint on acquisition in the first place that is that when you 
appropriate goods you have to leave enough and as good left in common for 
others enough and as good for others er well we'll come back in a minute to 
exactly what that means Nozick contrasts his historical entitlement approach to 
justice with er any principle that aims either to achieve a certain end state 
or to achieve a certain pattern of distribution er he rejects all principles 
that end e-, that aim at end states or patterns so there are a lot of familiar 
ad-, examples of such principles we've already come across like maximizing 
utility or maximin primary goods Rawls' principle er [sniff] 
now on the entitlement view things come into the world already attached to 
people who are entitled to them people's choices to transfer those entitlements 
simply don't have to conform to any pattern they can do what they like with 
them so he thinks this whole idea of a of a aiming at a pattern is misguided 
and he he claims that the benefits of the social surplus the the surplus that 
people get from cooperating with each other are not manna from heaven er that 
we can distribute freely it's not up to society to distribute this as if it 
were manna from heaven er w-, what does he mean by that exactly well let's 
think first about what if what if individuals were all like Robinson Crusoe 
every person had his own island and on that island he worked by himself he or 
she worked by themselves creating whatever they were creating building their 
tree houses or fishing well in that case he thinks it's clear that there would 
be no distribution er redistribution 
warranted that each Robinson Crusoe would be entitled to his own product 
[sniff] er well does cooperation change that if these different Robinson 
Crusoes suddenly get together and start cooperating and producing more than the 
total that they were producing separately is the surplus available for 
redistribution well a common answer is yes it is because once cooperation 
occurs we can no longer disentangle er the contributions that each individual 
makes to the product well Nozick rejects that answer he says yes we can 
disentangle the product if we can identify the different contributions er sorry 
if w-, we c-, if we can identify what different individuals need to be given as 
incentives to produce then we know what they are responsible for producing so 
the very same question the th-, a-, let me put it this way the answer to the 
question of who needs to be given incentives to contribute in order 
to generate extra product also answers the question of who's entitled to that 
product the two things go together so the surplus arrives in the world already 
attached to people and it's not available for redistribution in his view 
[cough] all right well that's all s-, that all sounds pretty radically 
unreconstructed sort of anti-welfare state stuff er how radical is it really 
would it actually wipe out the welfare state well there are two reasons to 
think it might not be quite as radical as it sounds at first er first remember 
that just acquisition of holdings is limited by the Lockean proviso which says 
that you can only take goods to begin with if you n-, leave asnough and as good 
for others so acquisitions that make others worse off are unjust and they have 
to be rectified well worse off compared to what you may ask well that's the 
critical 
point what's the baseline for comparisons er everything depends here on how you 
fix this baseline well he gives a few examples of what he has in mind you can't 
appropriate the only waterhole in the desert and make people pay you for y-, 
getting water from it why because that would leave them worse off than they 
would have been if you hadn't appropriated it er but contrast that with a 
different case if you invent a new medicine and you charge people for supplying 
them with this medicine then you can you can do that that's that's not unjust 
that's er compatible be-, you're you're not leaving anyone worse off than they 
would have been because if you hadn't invented this medicine they wouldn't have 
had the medicine anyway all right so that's the k-, the kind of er way he wants 
this distinction to apply okay so that's one reason we're limited by the 
Lockean proviso in what we can justly acquire in the first place and secondly 
his third principle says you have to 
rectify past injustices well if we think about it think about the history of er 
Western civilization there have been plenty of violations of the Lockean 
proviso people have been helping themselves to things that left other people 
worse off for a very long time so we've got an awful lot of accumulated past 
injustice that strictly speaking ought to be rectified in our societies and he 
admits Nozick admits that actually maybe er a rough rule of thumb which might 
have the effect of rectifying all this past injustice might be something rather 
like a maximin principle er you might assume that the people who were the 
victims of this past injustice er are now among the worst off members of 
society and a rough and ready way of rectifying it might be to make them as 
well off as you can so those are two reasons to think maybe it's not quite as 
anti-welfarist in its er anti-welfare state in its policy implications as it 
might sound the practical 
recommendations might not be that different all right so i want now to move on 
to discuss the objections that Nozick makes to Rawlsian justice in particular 
and also more generally to the whole idea of a pattern of redistribution which 
Rawls is one example of first there's er the interference objection this is an 
objection to pattern principles er of justice just principles that aim at some 
particular pattern of the distribution of goods in general not just to Rawls he 
illustrates this objection with this famous example of Wilt Chamberlain he 
supposes that we've got a just starting point er everybody's got a just amount 
of income to begin with and then er from this point we suppose that there's 
this fabulous basketball player and everybody is very enthusiastic about paying 
er a pound each or a a dollar each i guess he says to a twenty-five cent seat i 
can't believe that er have twenty-five anyway to see him play basketball so he 
ends up Wilt Chamberlain ends 
up far richer than anyone else and this is all a voluntary transfer from a just 
starting point now if we're trying to maintain a pattern of justice of d-, d-, 
pattern of distribution we're going to have to interfere continually to 
maintain that pattern when people make these voluntary transfers we're going to 
continually have to interfere with the liberty of people to buy things to 
transfer resources in the way that they choose so maintaining any pattern of 
distribution will require a constant interference in people's liberty he says 
[sniff] that's the objection well you might say wha-, [laugh] why wait a minute 
why is that an objection i mean that's just tax taxation i mean we're all 
familiar with taxation it's you're just wrinkling your nose when you when you 
say taxation yuck i mean that's not really an objection er well let's include a 
little bit more of the rhetoric here to er sort of illustrate this point er he 
says well 
look if the starting point is just then people s-, in that starting point 
supposedly should be entitled to dispose of their goods as they like well why 
doesn't that include transferring their money to someone else if they want he 
says no third party has any claim on your goods in the just starting point well 
why does that change if you transfer your good to a second party if the third 
party didn't have a claim to begin with why did they get one just because you 
transfer some money like you know when i transfer my twenty-five cents to Wilt 
Chamberlain he says a socialist society would have to forbid capitalist acts 
between consenting adults er and so he says people pattern principles let 
people spend their fair share on themselves but not on other people and that 
this is a kind of perverse individualism it's individualism with a vengeance he 
says you're only allowed to spend money on yourself but not on other people er 
and he also complains that er this 
kind of a restriction ignores the rights of donors the rights that people have 
to give gifts all right so there's some good rhetoric there this this remark 
about forbidding capitalist acts between consenting adults is reproduced in 
practically every introductory text to political philosophy but let's ask is 
there really a good argument behind this er well quite a few er different 
replies have been made er just to consider a few of them er first various 
critics have pointed out that really this point just begs the question he's 
simply assuming that an ideal starting point confers unqualified entitlements 
to transfer your goods but that assumption is precisely what any pattern view 
is rejecting so he he hasn't really given any independent argument he's just 
sort of begged the question with this rhetoric a second reply is that for a 
very important class of goods the rights of donors are irrelevant and these are 
goods that are your 
natural endowments your natural abilities or disabilities your t-, natural 
talents things like what family you're born into er these are not things that 
anyone gives you unless you want to think of them as the gifts of God or 
something but er barring that the r-, there's no donor whose rights are 
relevant er so we'll come back to this point about natural endowments shortly a 
third reply though focuses on goods for which there are actually donors er so 
it's er it's not pursuing the donor point er it says even if we consider goods 
which are given by human donors this argument still doesn't work it actually 
involves a confusion the argument er starts from er the idea about the correct 
fr-, from an idea about what it is for me to spend money on myself as opposed 
to spending it on other people and then it says well if i could spend it on 
myself why can't i spend it on other people that's individualism with a 
vengeance but this whole idea of spending money on myself is suspect 
it doesn't hold up er you can't you can you can give money to someone without 
getting anything i-, in return but that's not really spending it on yourself 
spending money on yourself involves transferring the money to someone else in 
exchange for something that you get from them that's what happens when you buy 
something for yourself you give your money to someone else who gives you 
something in exchange er you can't eat your money i mean there's no way of 
consuming your money without entering into an exchange with someone else okay 
so transferring money to someone else is part of what it is to spend money on 
yourself [sniff] so the er underlying point here is that exchanges and 
transfers provide the measure of income er we're not income isn't just bills 
you know pound notes or pound coins income is how many times those things get 
circulated in exchanges so to take an example suppose i 
earn a hundred pounds doing my job and i pay tax on that hundred pounds and 
i've got my leftover whatever it is sixty pounds and er i then come home and 
pay my housekeeper for cleaning my house er and i so i give her twenty pounds 
out of what i have left and she pays tax on that again now because that's the 
same ten er s-, ten pou-, er twenty pound note that i've already paid tax on 
doesn't she can't argue well i don't have to pay tax on that because you've 
already paid my tax that that would be crazy er so this er objection really 
seems to involve a very naive view about what it is what income is so every 
time people money and goods change hands in-, more income is generated all 
right so i don't think the Wilt Chamberlain non-interference objection gets 
very far let's go on now to consider er two more objections Nozick makes these 
are actually focused more on Rawls in particular and they concern 
especially the idea of Rawls that you derive principles of justice from the 
original position behind a veil of ignorance the second and these are quite 
closely related so i'll sort of give you a a brief idea of each of them and 
then i'll come back and look at them in turn a little more closely the second 
objection er Nozick makes is that the idea of deriving principles of justice 
from er a position of choice behind a veil of ignorance could never produce the 
kind of principles that he Nozick likes they could never produce historical 
entitlement principles er they'd have to produce some kind of an end state or 
pattern principle so he objects to this er choosing principles in the original 
position behind the veil idea because he thinks it's totally biased against the 
whole idea of an entitlement principle and a-, leads you necessarily toward the 
kind of principle 
he rejects the third er objection he makes is that if that's true that puts 
Rawls in an inconsistent position Nozick says look Rawls' argument depends 
essentially on a certain procedure er whatever principles would be agreed to in 
this position behind a veil of ignorance count as just so the procedure that 
people go through of choosing behind a veil of ignorance is what justifies 
these principles as just but he says well look if a procedure is good enough to 
justify these principles why aren't procedural principles good enough to start 
with like my entitlement principles er that he thinks there's a sort of 
inconsistency in having a procedure that can only justify non-procedural 
principles all right like pattern or end state principles which are not just a 
matter of what procedure you've historically gone through like his are all 
right that's just briefly to give you an idea of these two objections let's go 
back over them a little more 
slowly now let's look at this second objection [sniff] er in a nutshell this 
objection is that the original position is set up in a way that's biased 
against ever er yielding procedural principles of justice and ty-, historical 
entitlement type principles okay we can call that the bias objection [sniff] er 
[sniff] well why does Nozick think that people behind a veil of ignorance would 
never go for procedural principles would always go for some kind of pattern or 
end state principle to explain why he gives an example he asks us to imagine a 
group of students and these students are trying to decide on a marking scheme 
how they want their er their work to be marked and they're trying to do this 
from behind a veil of ignorance that is to say they don't know how good their 
work is they don't know what marks they're likely to get and he argues that in 
that position 
students would never agree to be marked on the merits er to have their work 
just really fairly at-, assessed on the merits they would rather agree to some 
marking scheme that gave them as good a chance as possible of getting a good 
mark or which guaranteed that they wouldn't fall below a certain level or 
something like that some kind of pattern or end state they would go for but not 
just to be marked on the merits er according to their entitlements er well 
let's think about that er how many students would actually choose to be marked 
on the merits if they were making this kind of a choice er in fact er in 
America i don't i i guess it's the case here for some courses there are a lot 
of a lot of places offer the option of er taking courses pass fail instead of 
getting marks in them and it's very unpopular hardly anyone does it they're per-
, per-, perfectly free to do it but people don't do it well you might say 
that's not really relevant for several reasons one 
they're not behind a veil of ignorance er and t-, two er you know the j-, the 
job market is such that you know that employers are going to wonder why you 
took things pass fail most students don't do it so if you do it it's going to 
look bad right so it's not exactly relevant but maybe it's suggestive anyway 
because there may be more to it than this i mean er let's make a thought 
experiment that makes it a little bit more relevant here er if you were 
starting out at university so you didn't really know what to expect say you'd 
got into a really good university much better than er most of the people who 
are in your secondary school did so you were there with a lot of really high 
powered people and you really had no idea how you were going to er come out in 
that competition and also let's suppose er that this is the only university in 
your country you're in a small country it has one university so er y-, the-, 
there aren't a lot of other universities doing 
something different and the student body now is voting on a marking scheme now 
we get a little bit closer to er the situation well er what would you what 
would you do let me just ask you how many of you in that situation would 
actually vote to be marked on the merits how many of you would vote for 
something other than being marked on the merits well all right i think that i 
think this is 
sf1168: er sorry but can you explain what on the merits means 
nf1167: on the merits it just means somebody marks you according to how good 
they think your work is on the merits of your work 
su1169: [laughter] 
nf1167: sorry did you not understand that do you want to tr-, do it again 
sf1170: yes 
nf1167: how many would you how how many would want to be marked according to 
how good they think the work is as opposed to just you know some kind of pass 
fail scheme or something like that if you if you pass the minimum amount then 
okay how many people would like to 
be marked on something other than on the merits [laughter] one brave soul good 
well anyway look i think there's something er revealing here i mean i don't 
know what your reasons are and i i'll maybe we can pursue this in the seminar 
and find out but at least i think some of you might be motivated in the 
following way you might think to yourselves well look it's a bit like engaging 
in a sport i'm going to put a lot of effort and a lot of time into this and i 
want to achieve as much as i can achieve and frankly i need the incentive i 
need the discipline to develop my own capacities to do as well as i can do i 
don't know what my capacities are but whatever they are i know that i want to 
develop them as much as i can and the incentive and discipline that being 
marked on the merits will provide will help me to do that er so that suggests 
that people enjoy developing their abilities they enjoy achieving 
whatever excellence they're capable of and i think that's actually quite an 
important and univ-, fairly universal motivation er it also suggests a reply to 
Nozick here er these students may well choose to be marked on the merits er 
even if they're behind a veil for this kind of reason er but it's interesting 
that Rawls actually says you know behind the veil you don't know anything about 
yourself personally but you do know some general psychological facts about 
human beings one of the things he allows is that what he calls the Aristotelian 
principle the Aristotelian principle says people enjoy exercising their 
abilities and they enjoy doing well what they can do so er you might wonder 
actually whether people behind Rawls' veil of ignorance might reasonably choose 
principles that give them some incentives to develop their capacities er might 
even choose principles that involve penalties along the way for failing to 
reach certain goals now you might say well 
wait a minute you wouldn't choose that if you didn't know whether you were 
handicapped whether you were disabled in some way er well this is a delicate 
matter i mean we have to y-, there there are lots of points that have to be er 
made and respected about disabilities but we certainly don't want to be in a 
position of arguing that er disabled people are any different from other people 
in respect of enjoying exercising their abilities and doing what they can do 
well i mean from you know Stephen Hawking to wheelchair sports er you've got 
lots of counter-examples to that so almost everyone has a capacity to do 
something well er it doesn't have to be something earth shaking er it can be 
just arranging flowers or you know er whatever but er people nevertheless enjoy 
developing their capacities whatever they are at whatever level they fall okay 
so that's in effect er a reply to this er second objection of Nozick that er 
the 
bias objection isn't really true [cough] the original position in the veil 
aren't really biased totally against entitlement princi-, principles they may 
even be more conducive to entitlement principles than Rawls himself seems to 
think okay let's now go on to Nozick's third objection er for this objection we 
have to suppose for the sake of argument that the bias objection is correct 
because it makes a sort of dilemma or inconsistency based on that er okay so 
we're supposing that the choice procedure behind the veil cannot yield 
procedural principles of justice er he says Nozick says well that would be it 
was it's inconsistent to appeal to a procedural choice er to justify principles 
if this procedure rules out procedural principles er so he says if procedures 
are so great that they can justify the principles they lead to then Rawls' 
theory is defective because it can't lead to procedural principles er and if 
procedural principles 
aren't good enough then Rawls' theory isn't justified anyway er so if 
procedures are good enough to base the choice of principles on they should be 
good enough to count as principles of justice he says er [cough] excuse me okay 
so how much is there in this er objection is there really any dilemma or 
inconsistency here after all for Rawls it's not just the fact that you've made 
a choice that you've gone through certain procedure er not any old procedure 
would do not any old choice not any old contract that people might make would 
have this special kind of justification attached to it what's very important 
for Rawls is the idea that people have chosen something behind a veil of 
ignorance and that's essential to the justification provided for what they 
choose it's essential to it because the whole idea is that there are morally 
arbitrary factors factors for which people aren't responsible that could 
influence er ordinary contracts and 
ordinary procedures so normally when people enter into contracts all sorts of 
morally arbitrary factors are influential er and that's why those contracts 
those procedures don't yield the special kind of justification that you get 
when you impose the veil of ignorance which excludes the influence of these 
morally arbitrary factors so it isn't just any old procedure it's a very 
special procedure er that Rawls appeals to so i don't actually think there's 
any dilemma or inconsistency here this argument doesn't work either [cough] so 
let's now move on to the fourth objection that Nozick makes er this is the 
forced labour objection he says taxation is equivalent to forced labour [sniff] 
taxation of earnings from labour is on a par with forced labour so seizing er 
the results of someone's labour is equivalent to seizing hours from them 
forcing them to work how does 
he er develop this idea well he compares two people er i'm i'm making up some 
names here i've got Amy and Zach the er intended A and Z in-, intended to 
suggest that this is a spectrum in between these two extremes Amy prefers 
overtime plus more money to leisure all right she's a a workaholic Zach prefers 
leisure to overtime they have the same abilities but they have different 
preferences so Amy likes to buy things with the extra money she work-, she gets 
by working overtime she's a sort of workaholic consumer type Zach is a surfer 
he works er you know the minimal working day and he spends the rest of his time 
surfing he'd rather surf than anything he could buy with the money he'd earn if 
he wasn't surfing so because Amy works overtime some of the extra money she 
earns goes to tax er it h-, goes to help the needy but when Zach goes surfing 
he's not taxed no extra cash is taken from him if his leisure spent surfing was 
taxed he would actually h-, have to work 
extra to get the cash to pay the tax on that extra er so he would be in effect 
forced to work more than he wants to forced to work overtime in order to pay 
tax well Nozick assumes that that would be wrong that that would be forced 
labour that Zach would be entitled not to work overtime if he chose this 
without being liable to tax on what he would have earned if he had worked 
overtime he says well look if er if Zach's not required to pay tax to he's not 
forced to work in order to pay tax on his leisure why should Amy be forced to 
work just because she prefers to work overtime why should only Amy be required 
to help the needy and not Zach er just because they have different tastes that 
seems unfair to workaholics and he er goes on with a whole lot of rhetorical 
questions he says some people's happiness depends on goods and services and 
they'd need money to buy them but other people's doesn't why do we treat them 
differently some people like to watch films so they 
need money to buy tickets to get into the cinema other people prefer to watch 
sunsets why should they why force the movie goer to help the needy and not help 
the sunset lover the nature lover to help the needy what justifies treating 
them differently okay well these are good questions actually they're serious 
questions in er [sniff] the tax tr-, about the tax treatment of leisure and 
they raise er serious issues about tax policy er how to value er leisure 
[sniff] so i think in order to understand what's going on here we make need to 
make a little bit of a digression er and think about what's in the background 
of some of these issues here our existing tax systems by and large er don't tax 
someone like Zach who chooses to con-, to consume his own leisure of course 
he'd be taxed on whatever he did earn for the hours he worked but he wouldn't 
be taxed on what he could earn if he worked more they n-, existing tax 
systems don't tax leisure er so someone like Zach is treated in effect more 
favourably than someone like Amy er well why what's the explanation of this is 
it because we have an aversion to er forced labour or is it for some other 
reason er well let's let's think a bit more about this now er i said Zach and 
Amy have the same abilities but different preferences Amy er chooses to 
exercise her earning ability t-, mo-, more fully than Zach does well why 
doesn't Zach want to exercise it so one possibility is Zach may genuinely 
prefer to surf er but another possibility is this he may think well look 
consumption of my own leisure time is not subject to tax while if i work and 
buy something else it is subject to tax so actually it's a better deal to 
consume my own leisure time 'cause it's tax free er and since his leisure time 
is tax free he may decide he wants to consume more 
leisure than he would otherwise that's a bit like buying more whisky than you 
might want otherwise because you're in duty free er so if Zach were influenced 
by this kind of reasoning he might well er decide to take more leisure spend 
more time surfing than he would otherwise in that case the tax system would be 
distorting his decisions about how much to work inducing him to work less and 
that's widely regarded as a bad thing for a tax system to induce that kind of 
distortion in the labour supply now how could that be avoided how could a tax 
system avoid that well there's a way that's widely er known and discussed it's 
completely impractical but it would it would theoretically do the trick and 
that is you tax people's leisure as well as their income that is to say you tax 
their earning ability not what they actually earn but the ability to earn that 
they have er what they c-, you tax them on what they 
could earn if they were to exercise their earning ability fully now that in 
effect treats people as if they're having to buy their own leisure time back 
out of their full er earning ability er that kind of tax is called a lump sum 
tax you owe a fixed amount based on your earning ability and you can't change 
it by how much you choose to work you can't reduce it by choosing to work less 
you owe it whether you work or not and because of that you actually have to 
work because you can't pay it out of leisure you have to work enough at least 
to get the money to pay the tax so that in a sense does force you to work okay 
so this is a scheme that says if you have the ability to earn a certain income 
you owe tax on that amount of income whether you choose to exercise that 
ability or not is down to you we don't care let's notice three things about 
this idea of lump sung sum taxation well first it avoids this distortion 
er people no longer have incentive to work less than they would you can't 
reduce the amount of tax you owe by er working less er second as i said it does 
in a sense force people to work in order to pay this inflexible tax you have to 
work at least enough to get the money for the tax er so that may be regarded as 
a distortion of their choices as well [sniff] er it's not subsidizing leisure 
but it's er doing something else maybe it's even worse does it violate their 
rights of self-ownership er Nozick at any rate thinks that this is such a bad 
idea that he doesn't really even take it seriously er he thinks if he can 
persuade us that taxing say a movie goer is just as bad as taxing a sunset 
lover then we won't tax either of them he doesn't think er well he doesn't even 
take seriously the possibility we might tax both of them but we should ask well 
is it really that bad is does it really violate s-, rights of self-ownership to 
do this er or are d-, are 
people do r-, people really have rights of self-ownership that would rule this 
kind of thing out er well the third point about lump sum taxes undercuts these 
first two points really and that's the point that it's just completely 
impractical why er because it provides an incentive to people to hide their 
true abilities talented productive people will have an incentive to pretend to 
be less talented less productive to reduce their tax er by behaving as if they 
were less talented and less productive because after all the government doesn't 
know what your true earning ability is all it can observe is how you behave so 
very productive people may have an incentive to behave as if they were less 
productive and that's a bad distortion on the labour supply that's probably 
worse than the other one er okay so er there's no reliable way to get the 
information you'd need to avoid this bad incentive effect er one way of doing 
it might be 
to pretend everyone had the same abilities and tax everyone exactly the same 
regardless of their abilities but that's really going to be very hard on people 
who actually are disabled who actually do have very reduced abilities so that 
doesn't really work either okay so it's a very impractical idea the lump sum 
tax idea this is a very brief breezy summary of some very complicated and deep 
issues about tax policy but i th-, the point i'm trying to make here is look 
we've got another explanation of why we don't tax Zach on his leisure er in 
theory if we c-, really could measure people's earning abilities maybe we would 
maybe we wouldn't be worried about the forced labour idea the reason we don't 
do it isn't that it's that it's just completely impractical that's why we don't 
do it all right so er i don't think that the forced labour objection gets very 
far either this is another one that er 
counts as shooting from the hip but now i think we're getting closer to the 
area where the really er important objections lie which i think do actually hit 
their targets and these are the objections that have to do with the idea of 
moral arbitrariness er i think his ideas about moral arbitrariness are central 
to why Rawls rejects anything like Nozick's position and Nozick disagrees with 
him here at the heart of his theory er Rawls thinks that talents and abilities 
disabilities that people are born with the family situations they're born into 
the upbringings they receive are morally arbitrary but what does that mean it 
means they're not responsible for them they don't deserve them in any sense at 
times he even seems to think that the effort they make the degree of effort 
they exert is morally arbitrary that that's almost like another talent they 
have okay so er these morally arbitrary factors are not 
chosen by the person they're not responsible for them and the idea here is that 
morality and justice should not depend on factors that are arbitrary from a 
moral point of view factors that are merely matters of luck that expresses a 
Kantian view which is at the heart of Rawls' Theory of Justice Kant thought 
that the demands of morality and justice could not depend on merely empirical 
factors on merely contingent differences between people between their different 
personalities and desires they had to be the demands of justice had to be er an 
expression of pure reason abstracted from all the contingencies of the 
empirical world er and an aspect of each person in Kant's view is that each 
person has a capacity to respond to pure reason to form intentions on the basis 
of pure reason this capacity is an aspect of what Kant regarded as the purely 
rational self or the the noumenal self to use his technical term er so people 
had this 
capacity of the in their er that resided in their noumenal aspect with their 
noumenal selves to act on the basis of pure reason apart from all these morally 
arbitrary factors and in that respect Kant regarded people as fundamentally 
free and equal well Rawls says at one point in A Theory of Justice that his 
original position can be thought of as the point of view from which noumenal 
selves see the world so it's because differences in your abilities your natural 
abilities your upbringing and so on are a matter of rock are morally arbitrary 
that Rawls wants to exclude them from influencing what goes on in the original 
position he does that through the veil of ignorance so the veil of ignorance 
sort of strips people down of all these arbitrary differences er in their own 
conception the way they can see themselves behind the veil er all that's left 
is a sort of our morally equal abstract selves that are supposed to carry out a 
search for reasons that are prior 
to all these different arbitrary factors that differentiate people prior to 
good and bad luck now it's those ideas i've just sketched a sort of cluster of 
Kantian ideas at the heart of Rawls' theory it's those ideas that Nozick 
launches his most telling attack at er and there are at least three different 
strands of this attack that we can differentiate first er he says the moral 
arbitrariness line of thought is dangerous it proves too much er it's supposed 
to stop us from er giving moral significance to er the results of certain you 
know free market transactions and so on but it can only do that by doing a lot 
more than that by attributing in effect everything noteworthy about a person to 
morally arbitrary factors 'cause after all if we go back far enough to before 
someone's birth he's not responsible for any of the factors that lead to his 
own birth or to his genetic make-up the environment in which he grows up and so 
on so we end up er calling his 
responsibility for anything into question this leads to an unexalted view of 
people as not responsible for anything at all and he says Nozick says well 
that's a very risky line to take for someone like Rawls because Rawls wants to 
defend the dignity and self-respect of autonomous human beings er so before we 
go down the route that this moral arbitrariness idea forces on us we'd better 
stop and think whether we really want to end up where it takes us maybe Kant 
was actually wrong second Nozick says look er the view that differences between 
people need to be justified just begs the question it simply presupposes 
equality is a default position why do differences particularly need to be 
justified people just are different that doesn't need justification now here he 
actually flings back at Rawls something very close to the criticism Rawls that 
makes of utilitarianism remember Rawls criticizes utilitarianism for conflating 
the different desires of 
different people and treating them as if they were all the desires of one big 
person he trades the pleasures and pains of different people off against one 
another er Rawls says that doing this fails to take seriously the separateness 
of persons well Nozick says er by assuming the differences between people need 
to be justified Rawls is failing to take seriously the distinctions the 
differences between people at an even deeper level er he says all these morally 
arbitrary supposedly morally arbitrary features of people that we're supposed 
to sort of abstract from if we press too hard on this distinction between 
people and these morally arbitrary factors we're not left with any coherent 
conception of a person there's nothing left er people just are these bundles of 
morally arbitrary factors [sniff] so we deprive people of their very identity 
if we push this line er and that's quite 
similar actually to the objection that Rawls himself makes against the sort of 
bare person idea remember we discussed that last time er all right er so the 
idea then is we should be just as unhappy about this Kantian version of the 
noumenal self bare person as we were about the utilitarian version of the 
remember the bare person who had an equal chance of being anyone then one's no 
better than the other and er people aren't bare selves of that kind and justice 
doesn't need them that's the sort of line okay so that's the the second point 
the third er strand of this sort of attack on the Kantian heart of Rawls' 
theory is that actually er there's a kind of inconsistency here because Rawls' 
theory does allow morally arbitrary differences to have an influence on 
people's just shares remember after all the maximin principle allows incentive 
in equalities it says [sniff] if by allowing for inequalities you can 
give the more productive people incentives that make them produce more in a way 
that makes everybody better off including the worst off that's okay but people 
actually don't deserve to be more productive so why should they benefit from 
those morally arbitrary factors er well in fact Jerry Cohen coming in from the 
left er the opposite direction from Nozick presses that very question against 
Rawls he says he doesn't he rejects Rawls' reasoning for this sort of maximin 
idea er well h-, he rejects aspects of of the reasoning because he says just 
that the more productive aren't responsible for being more productive and they 
jolly well could do the extra work without getting the extra product so why 
should they get the extra product okay so Rawls seems to be sort of cut er in 
he seems to be caught in between the right wing attack from Nozick and the left 
wing attack from Cohen he's he's trying to allow a little bit of incentive and 
equality but allowing a little bit sort of is to have neith-, neither one thing 
nor the other er all right i think some of these points here really do hit 
their target the underlying point is expressed by Nozick when he says that the 
foundations underlying desert don't themselves need to be deserved all the way 
down people may be entitled to what flows from their natural assets even if 
their natural assets are morally arbitrary well let's just focus er on what's 
at issue here it may seem that rights of self-ownership are at issue er i don't 
actually think however that whether people have these strong rights is the 
critical point er i don't think we have to believe in rights of self-ownership 
in order to think that there's something to what Nozick is saying i think the 
real issue is about a certain principle which i'm going to call the 
responsibility for causes principle and this principle says this it 
says that to be responsible s-, for something you have to be responsible for 
its causes to be responsible for something you have to be responsible for its 
causes Rawls seems to assume that he says different earning levels are caused 
by different natural endowments you don't deserve your natural endowments so 
you don't deserve your earnings level Nozick seems to reject that principle er 
well should we actually accept this principle notice how if you accept the 
principle that you have to be responsible for causes you can apply it again and 
again not just do i have to be responsible for the causes of any choice i make 
but for the causes of those causes and the causes of those causes and so on all 
the way back er but pretty soon we're going to get back to a point before i was 
even alive i couldn't possibly be responsible for those causes all the way back 
the result is if you accept this principle it looks as if nobody's ever 
responsible for anything er 
responsibility seems to be impossible if we accept this principle well we have 
to think very hard then about whether we actually do ac-, accept it we don't 
usually think that nobody's responsible for anything er so our normal er 
practices of attributing responsibility people are inconsistent with this 
principle er so we could deny that this principle was true there's no 
incoherence in denying it er we need to think very hard about whether to accept 
it one thing i want to say er though is that we shouldn't think that a reason 
to accept this principle is that if we do it will support egalitarianism that 
would not only be wishful thinking but it would be an illusion because if no 
one's responsible for anything if no one ever deserves anything it does not 
follow that everyone does deserve the same thing that's just a fallacy er so 
making responsibility impossible does not provide any independent grounds for 
being an egalitarian all right er there we go then for today er next time 
communitarianism