nm0969: accent on growth our interest in the agriculture sector somewhere 
lagging behind where the other ideas about agriculture it's shiny shiny shiny 
er big capital investments in machinery irrigation and the like er the 
attraction the siren call of large scale farming and the siren call of easily 
transferable technology okay all of that trucks ahead from the fifties and 
sixties through to the early nineteen-seventies and in the early nineteen-
seventies we get an accumulation of doubts about whether development is really 
again about economic growth alone and last week we'd just got to those doubts 
and what were the doubts rising inequality and the massive differential between 
the favelas of the hillsides of Rio and the luxury apartments down in Ipanema 
Leblon Barra da Tijuca and the enormous disparities you would see in Mexico 
City between the swanky houses at the western end of town and the slums up to 
the north of Mexico City political disappointments were there and 
particularly in what had happened in the newly independent states of Africa and 
the recently independent states of Asia where dictatorship reign er 
disappointments about the lack of urban jobs about the degree of informality of 
petty enterprise that people were undertaking in the cities the idea of Arthur 
Lewis that there was this ability to transfer from the traditional to the 
modern sector that this would soak up unemployment and create higher marginal 
productivity of labour did not seem to be working and that seemed to be owing 
to the inappropriate transfer of capital intensive agriculture industry and 
anything else from the north to the south okay those are are all the doubts now 
you need to know a little bit of history to understand how doubt crystallizes 
into action if you'd opened up books on development in the early nineteen-
seventies you would have seen 
an awful lot of influential books really arguing that development was not just 
a game in economic growth look here's here's an influential book R-W Gee 
nineteen-seventy-five Redistribution with Growth published on behalf of the 
World Bank in nineteen-seventy-five this was a series of essays by some of the 
foremost development economists of the time and it argued the following that 
there was no trade-off between distributional objectives and economic growth in 
other words if you wanted the fastest and best return on capital put it into 
small scale industry put it into artisan industry put it into the urban 
informal sector and put it into small scale farming R-W Gee argued that that 
would give you faster rates of growth than investing in large scale formal 
enterprise be it urban or rural now this was wonderful news to have academics 
argue this because it was two for the price of one bet on the smallest and you 
not only get equity but you also get faster economic 
growth but the real spur i suppose to the changes of the nineteen-seventies 
come from the events of nineteen-seventy-three now nineteen-seventy-three is 
one of the more interesting years of the last century er nineteen-seventy-three 
is the height of a world economic boom now remember what we saw last week the 
world economy grew steadily er betw-, in the nineteen-fifties and nineteen-
sixties at rates that we don't think we've seen sustained before or since in 
the recorded history of humanity and those rates steamed on ahead into the 
early nineteen-seventies and culminated in a huge boom period which lasted 
seventy-two seventy-four just about every country in the world had a boom 
period seventy-two seventy-four if you like the macroeconomic shorthand world 
economies economies throughout the world overheated during seventy-two seventy-
four and that overheating pushed up the price of all commodities of all primary 
commodities they all went 
up now one that everybody knows about is the one that went up in October 
seventy-three the world commodity whose price quadrupled in October seventy-
three what commodity was that 
sm0970: oil 
sm0971: oil 
nm0969: oil it was the first time that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting 
Countries had flexed its muscles and said let's see what we can do and led by 
Saudi Arabia those oil exporting countries in OPEC said what happens if we 
unilaterally raise the price of oil by four times and they tried it and it 
stuck and the world oil price rocketed upwards now that's the one that 
attracted all the attention well most of the attention except in seventy-three 
the world wheat price and all other cereals was dragged up by more than double 
by more than double i think it's triple may even be more than three times the 
world wheat price spiked now that world wheat price spiked was caused in part 
and probably largely by a harvest failure in the Soviet Union and as the Soviet 
Union's harvest 
failed the Soviet Union imported about twenty-five-million tons extra of 
cereals in seventy-three that was a very large rise indeed er and it blasted 
the price of of wheat now wheat was also dragged upwards by the general 
inflation of the time but the effect of the rise in the wheat pr-, c-, er wheat 
price was dramatic on people interested in food policy and the the the real 
story that we've got there was an American commentator writing in Time magazine 
he said you have seen what Americans are doing on the forecourts this year wait 
till they're in a bread queue now what's the amre-, reference to the American 
forecourts when the world oil price went up by four times something happened in 
the oil supply chain and for a brief period Americans had undersupply of gas 
and it led to queuing on American forecourts and Americans with large gas 
guzzling cars found themselves queuing for fuel and inevitably in a very large 
country there were one or two well publicized 
incidents yeah some drunken redneck in some place got out of his large car 
having queued for forty minutes picked up a shotgun and said right you fill 
this one up right now mate or that's it yeah one or two incidents like that you 
you can imagine and this gripped the imagination of American policy makers if 
Americans behave like this when they have to queue a little while for gas what 
happens when they have to queue for bread yeah why queue for bread well the 
wheat price had gone up now you also have to understand that during the sixties 
world population growth rates had risen the grates had risen so not only was 
world population going up but it was going up exponentially and the rate was 
increasing at that rate you reach infinite population fairly quickly fairly 
quickly what nobody knew then is what we all know now and that was the arrow 
that looked like that but none of you can see this er let's let's do the job 
properly er where are we see if 
you looked at world population growth rates during the twentieth century and 
that's nineteen-fifties so and we're talking now about nineteen-seventy you've 
got a pattern that looks something like this yeah and people looked at that and 
they said wow you know any number you like by the end of the twentieth century 
unimaginable numbers by twenty-twenty-five yeah any projection that took the c-,
the the the trends at that time reached an Olympic amount of of population 
very quickly people said look if that's what's happened to population growth 
rates and if agricultural growth is good but not spectacular what's going to 
happen so we got the th-, the old favourite geometrical growth of population 
versus something looking like arithmetic growth of farm output equals famine 
yeah equals Thomas Malthus bunch of guys published a book in the late sixties 
called Famine nineteen-seventy-five was it Famine nineteen-seventy-five i think 
so they were actually right about Famine nineteen-seventy-five what they didn't 
realize was where it'd be and what the extent of it was be but you see when 
people looked at that and then they looked at this wheat price 
nm0969: is it 
this is the first stage of the food crisis apocalypse and so in seventy-three 
or seventy-four we have something called the World Food Congress convened by 
the Food and Agriculture Organization of Rome and it meets to deal with the 
world food crisis which c-, surely has come to rest with the world that is a 
huge spur to changing development ideas the idea that the food is now in 
aggregate short supply and we've got a supply-side crunch in food a supply-side 
crunch now what do you need to know you need to know that history makes fools 
of us all that graph there it doesn't carry on like that what happens to it is 
it starts going like this yeah something like that there's been a very 
considerable fall in population growth rates since 
nineteen-seventy world population growth rates of nineteen-seventy were what 
over two per cent maybe as much as two-and-a-half per cent per year world 
population growth rates are below two per cent per day er t-, er two per cent a 
year two per cent a day strewth two per cent a year they're somewhere i'll be 
about one-point-seven per cent one-point-eight per cent i'm guessing somewhere 
between one-and-a-half and two per cent they've come down and so we're looking 
at this and people can now reasonably say that by the time we get to the year 
what twenty-thirty twenty-forty world population growth will be very slow 
indeed we'll be getting pretty close to what we think may be the maximum 
population in this stage of human history we also know that the world wheat 
price which spiked in seventy-three within a year or two it was back down to 
its normal levels now for those of you who don't know this story if we plotted 
the world wheat price from round about here if this is 
the world wheat price in nineteen-fifty or so what we're going to see is a 
story that looks something like this that's the world wheat price over the last 
fifty years more or less there's the spike in the early nineteen-seventies 
that's the nineteen-ninety-six spike by the way which lasted all of what six 
months twelve months at most but the general picture of the real world wheat 
price is down down down er so the world food crisis was a short-lived event in 
the early seventies but it contributed to the big change in development 
thinking and what we find in the early nineteen-seventies is we find 
developmental specialists coming up with the following signpost to development 
now redistribution with growth is one of those let's have attention to equit-, 
equity so development now is not just economic growth but it's economic growth 
with equity with decent distribution of the benefits now here's another of the 
T-L-As that you perhaps 
need to know or don't need to know basic human needs the I-L-O the 
International Labour Organization said let's plan for development on the basis 
of meeting everybody's basic human needs let's let's not just go for maximum 
economic growth or industrial growth or iron and steel production what we 
should aim to do is satisfy everybody's basic human needs and those basic human 
needs nutrition shelter and housing clean water basic education health services 
clothing right satisfy those basic human needs of everybody more or less 
equivalent to alleviating poverty and the same organization I-L-O also came up 
with a similar message in a different set of clothes when it talked about 
employment first policies developing development plans producing development 
plans where the maximum goal was to create jobs and they sent missions famously 
to Sri Lanka Kenya and Colombia of very eminent development specialists who 
produced indicative development plans aiming to maximize the creation of jobs 
and here's another touchstone of this period appropriate technology lack of 
jobs in the south urban unemployment casualization of labour well went the 
argument that's because we've brought the wrong technology it uses capital and 
saves labour do remember of course that the technology developed in the west in 
the fifties and sixties was technology from America from Germany from the U-K 
from France all of those countries were short of labour in the fifties and 
sixties never forget that all of those countries invited large numbers of guest 
workers and immigrants to make up the labour deficiency hard to believe in 
these days of s-, tightening immigration controls and concerns about 
international migration but in the fifties and sixties all of those countries 
wanted people to come in they were short of labour so all of their technology 
was labour saving well the appropriate 
technology movement said look what we want is technology that can be maintained 
locally uses local materials and above all saves on capital and uses labour 
responds to the factor proportions available in the developing world now armed 
with these ideas one by one all of the major development agencies the World 
Bank Britain's O-D-A America's U-S-AID er the I-L-O you name it they all signed 
up for variants on development with equity and the most famous moment in this 
was a speech in nineteen-seventy-three in Nairobi Kenya by the then President 
of the World Bank Robert McNamara in which he committed the World Bank to 
shifting its resources to development projects which stressed redistribution 
with growth now what did that mean in terms of concrete development policy well 
what it did mean was it meant that you went for targeting the poorest you 
looked actively for the poor for the small scale for the meek and the humble 
and you tried to 
target those as the focus of your development efforts and where this went 
sectorially was all of a sudden agriculture was king agriculture was king and 
it was king because that's where most of the poor were it was king because that 
was where so so many small scale entrepreneurs were smallholders and it was 
king because of the perceived world food crisis so agriculture was the win win 
win bet small scale agriculture you'd help the poor you'd drive forward 
economic growth and you'd solve the world food crisis so agriculture got prime 
attention in this now here's another idea out of the seventies I-R-D integrated 
rural development and this was the idea that when you worked in rural areas 
with the poor with the small scale and so on what you tried to do is to deliver 
a package of assistance across sectors on the grounds this would give you 
synergy now just to give you a fairly exaggerated example but if you're trying 
to get people to 
plant new varieties of rice and use fertilizer to increase their rice yields 
which you hope is a scale neutral technology that can be used by smallholders 
then why not at the same time er combat malaria inoculate people against 
diseases and clean up the water supply because all of those will give you 
better health which is a good thing in itself but of course healthier farmers 
can work harder in the fields and so that complements the agricultural measures 
and while we're at it we're going to build some access roads because that will 
improve price relatives at the farm gate reduce isolation and while we're at it 
we'll run a an adult literacy campaign because literate farmers can read the 
labels on the fertilizer packet and so on and so forth so there was the idea 
that you should try and do things in development in an integrated fashion 
across all sectors because you get synergy and you get more than the sum of the 
parts going on now integrated rural development was 
very very exciting to work in er very exciting to work in you got all kinds of 
things to have a go at er and you've got quite a lot of resources to play with 
but these resources were limited compared to needs so what happened with 
integrated rural development was within any country what you did is you took a 
country and a country might just look like that and might have its capital 
there and you take a country that looks like that and you do integrated rural 
development and you do it there there there there there oh and there right and 
yes that is to scale yes that is to scale in other words you get these little e-
, enclaves of very small areas where donors are putting in resources and 
everything is done now that country there some of you will have have have 
sussed er despite its wobbly outline is Kenya and in the early nineteen-
seventies Kenya had six small integrated rural development programmes which 
were very well documented and some contemporary very influential 
thinkers about development worked on those projects in the early nineteen-
seventies but look how tiny they are compared to the mass of Kenya that really 
is to scale these things were in very small areas indeed why because although 
you could target resources for a small area you couldn't have the whole country 
running the kinds of programmes that were run there so because you did 
everything in a integrated rural development you could only do it on a small 
scale concentrated in particular areas and because you were trying to do 
everything donors very often ran very special administrative structures quite 
different to normal government operations to c-, make these things work now 
those six small experiences i think were all successes they were all successes 
but i think with the benefit of hindsight we have to say they were unrepeatable 
and institutionally unsustainable when the donors got bored and the funds ran 
out and the foreign experts' contracts 
ended and the Landrovers began to rust these projects essentially stopped 
indeed i arrived in this part of Kenya in nineteen-seventy-nine which had been 
the administrative headquarters including that area there and there were two or 
three filing cabinets chock-a with files in my room and i i left them there for 
a while and then one day i thought what on earth er and i went through these 
filing cabinets and it was all the stuff on sort of four or five years ten 
years earlier of the implementation of this minutes plans documents contracts 
budgets semi-annual reports monthly reports all kinds of stuff and i looked at 
this and i said my goodness this is a vital bit of development history here 
[laugh] but it's clogging up my office [laugh] so it all went in a skip [laugh] 
there's never en-, never enough historians around to document these experiences 
and that's the sort of way and as i threw them in the skip i thought there you 
go good idea at the time good people working 
on it quite a success but not sustainable now one thing that you need to 
understand about these efforts of agriculture first targeting the poor is basic 
human needs integrated rural development is one element of the development 
equation hasn't changed in all this and that is this is a game about the state 
and the state's agencies nobody is seriously questioning that if you're going 
to do integrated rural development it will be the Ministry of Agriculture and 
the Department of Health and the Directorate of Transport and so on 
it will be state agencies leading the charge and if the state agencies lack 
resources they'll get money from governments in other countries so it's a 
government first approach nobody's really challenging the supreme role of the 
state as an organizer and an investor in development now look these ideas are 
publicized in the early nineteen-seventies one by one in the early nineteen-
seventies all the major aid donors sign up to this new agenda and it's a very 
different agenda to the one that's prevailed for the previous twenty years one 
by one the agencies published documents saying this is what we're going to do 
now Britain had a world had a a world had a White Paper on development in 
nineteen-ninety-seven the previous one was all the way back in nineteen-seventy-
five so the white the last White Paper er so recent was the first one in nearly 
a quarter of a century er the nineteen-seventy-five White Paper er was called 
More Aid to the Poorest and it was at the height of 
enthusiasm for these ideas More Aid to the Poorest what is the nineteen-ninety-
seven one called forgotten what the nineteen ninety-seven one was called but 
what's it about it's about reducing poverty by half in other words every time 
Britain has a White Paper on development it's heavily focused on poverty so 
Britain signed up to this in in in nineteen-seventy-five as did just about 
every other aid agency now what you have to understand about history is that if 
people write things down on documents in nineteen-seventy-three seventy-four 
seventy-five about we are going to do this how long does it take to make the 
plans for the new investments and the new direction of money one two three 
years at least before you redirect the flows of money create the new agencies 
the new plans the programmes so these I-R-Ds not many were in operation before 
the mid-nineteen-seventies and how long before you think it's fair to say what 
is the experience of things well when 
you're working in rural development anything less than five years is the short 
term er difficult to do things in agriculture and rural areas in less than five 
years so in other words as we come to the end of the seventies it's very early 
days with this new agenda it's barely started to be implemented in any great 
seriousness and the results are not entirely clear before we reach that the 
whole thing is flipped the whole cooking pot is turned upside down the pancake 
is turned and we're into the nineteen-eighties and by the time we're into the 
nineteen-eighties the entire focus of development has jumped radically from 
where it was in the early seventies now it's quite a long story to explain why 
development ideas in the nineteen- eighties were so radically different you've 
got them spelled out in your notes in some considerable detail let me try and 
summarize that experience what you have to understand is that from the early 
seventies onwards there was this 
primary boom and there was inflation beginning to come into the world economy 
in nineteen-seventy-one America left the gold standard the dollar which had 
been anchored against gold and had been the bulwark of the world economy for 
twenty-five years or so after the Second World War was suddenly cut free from 
gold it was effectively devalued remember in nineteen-seventy the American 
economy made up about one-third of the total product of the world economy today 
it's about twenty-five per cent or less at that time America was just mega on 
the scene and its currency was underwritten by the strength of America and it 
was pegged to gold and we had fixed exchange rates from nineteen-seventy-one 
America devalued the dollar and the exchange rates floated and from that moment 
onwards the major industrial economies which in the fifties and sixties had had 
inflation rates of one two three per cent per year suddenly found themselves 
with inflation rates running at ten per cent 
fifteen per cent twenty per cent none of you in this room these days will 
probably believe me when i tell you that in nineteen-seventy-nine Britain's 
rate of inflation was twenty- five per cent yes i can hardly believe that as 
the words come out of my mouth and i can remember the year very c-, very 
distinctly think about it during a year prices go up by a quarter it's 
unimaginable back then now and it was unimaginable in the sixties but in the 
seventies world inflation inflation in every country moved up a gear and it 
moved to double digit or more now the effect of the rise in oil prices was 
tremendous on the world economy what happened basically was that every country 
importing oil suddenly paid an awful lot of money to countries that exported 
oil and that huge transfer of resources meant that some of the oil exporters 
many of them small countries with limited investment possibilities at home how 
much money can you spend in Kuwait you can build a new airport a 
desalination plant you can build all kinds of luxury items as well as new 
hospitals and so on and you still haven't used up these hundreds of millions of 
dollars which are flowing in as oil rents so a lot of that oil money was put 
back into western banks in Zurich London Frankfurt New York Miami and so on and 
the money was then lent back to people who needed money now the people who 
needed money were countries that suddenly faced a higher oil import bill and 
had to cover the cost of that and those countries in the developing world who'd 
seen such incredibly fast growth in the late sixties early seventies that they 
honestly believed with very good justification that there was no way that they 
couldn't pay back any amount of debt that they could possibly get now the 
classic country for this is this country Brazil nineteen Brazil in the early 
nineteen-seventies wish we had a Tardis a time machine to take you to Brazil in 
the early nineteen-seventies boy would 
you enjoy it this was a country which was so self-confident i'd never seen 
anything like it i've never seen a country so full of its own self-confidence 
about what it was up to and what the future was there in n-, in the early 
seventies Brazil had been growing for many years at seven or eight per cent per 
annum it was one of the world's fastest growing economies probably the world's 
fastest growing economy it had a mega-city which promised to be the world's 
biggest and most important city by the end of the twentieth century and that 
was 
SÃ£o Paulo it also had unimaginable natural resources or appeared to have most 
of Brazil's population and economic developments concentrated in a small area 
coastal strip and above all Southern Brazil all the Amazonian forests were out 
there barely touched and those seemed to be a limitless supply of natural 
resources for agriculture and hu-, who knew in the early seventies what mineral 
resources there weren't somewhere in the 
Amazon there's Brazil second or third largest country in territory in the world 
with apparently unimaginable riches and already growing as quickly as possible 
and of course culturally Brazil knew it was the greatest country in the world 
because the finest football team ever seen to date had just won the World Cup 
in nineteen-seventy er legendary team of nineteen-seventy with Pele Jairzinho 
and so on er Brazilians just believed they'd got it made now the Brazilian 
government that was a military dictatorship run by technocrats said look we'll 
borrow to build the world's largest hydroelectric dam on the Parana river here 
we'll borrow money to drive roads four-thousand kilometres across the Aramazon 
from east to west from north to south we'll borrow money for hydroelectric dams 
on the SÃ£o Francisco river we'll borrow money for this we'll borrow money for 
that and nobody lending the money thought they could ever lose lending to 
Brazil Brazil was a sovereign state it 
could always pay back the money it was large it was growing quickly whatever 
you lent Brazil in twenty years time that would be really small change that 
Brazil would just pay back very very easily in-, indeed and indeed the interest 
rates weren't that high world interest rates in the nineteen-seventies were no 
more nominal than about fifteen per cent and yet world inflation dollar 
inflation was frequently getting up to fifteen per cent in several years in the 
nineteen-seventies world interest rates in real terms were negative right so 
all you had to do was take the money you were lent put it into real estate gold 
or anything that kept its value and you were getting a free gift from the banks 
so everywhere you looked at it borrowing borrowing borrowing made a lot of 
sense Brazil borrowed a bundle Argentina did so did Chile so did all the Latin 
American countries so did the Philippines er and so did Mexico and Mexico 
borrowed a bundle and Mexico was an oil 
exporter as well at a time that the oil price was going up nobody could ever 
lose anything lending to Mexico there was no way that Mexico could overborrow 
it had huge oil reserves and oil price was going up and Mexico was also growing 
as quickly as Brazil er you couldn't lose lending to Mexico now that was what 
happened during the nineteen-seventies now towards the end of the nineteen-
seventies the world economy began to hit a rocky patch and that rocky patch is 
marked by the phenomenon of stagflation now the old Keynesian truths were 
rather simple you could boost aggregate demand in your economy get the economy 
to grow bring down unemployment but you were always going to risk pushing up 
the inflation rate or in the Keynesian model reduce aggregate demand take away 
the inflationary force and accept slower growth and fewer jobs but in the late 
seventies country after country in the industrialized world began to experience 
the worst 
of both worlds rising rates of unemployment hesitant economic growth and high 
rates of inflation Mrs Thatcher went into the nineteen-seventy-nine election in 
this country with an election poster that was very famous called Britain isn't 
working picking up on the figure that for the first time since the war Britain 
had got a million people unemployed in the late seventies that was a shocking 
statistic 
in the sixties very very few people were unemployed few hundred-thousand now 
we'd got a million unemployed and inflation was high as well and on the basis 
of this quite trenchant critique of the facts of a er of the Labour 
administration of the late nineteen-seventies Mrs Thatcher won her election 
victory now unlike other Conservative regimes after the Second World War Mrs 
Thatcher came to power with a very different set of economic advisers to those 
that had accompanied people like Edward Heath er in the early nineteen-
seventies her advisers were not Keynesian macroeconomists they were monetarists 
and they said the main aim of economic policy is not Keynesian demand 
management it's a stable money supply get inflation down and you know how 
monetarists do this you do it by cranking the big lever of well come on sorry 
this is just a rampant monologue er how do you 
how do you stop infla-, how do you stop inflation for a monetarist 
sm0972: interest rates 
nm0969: interest rates yeah you control the money supply and you do it by 
raising interest rates er so Britain got a monetarist Chancellor of the 
Exchequer who will who pushed up the interest rates like crazy by nineteen-
eighty-three Britain's inflation that was twenty-five per cent in nineteen-
seventy-nine was three per cent something like that it worked it worked 
magnificently well as a way of getting inflation out of the British economy but 
Mrs Thatcher came to power in seventy-nine with a million people unemployed how 
many people were unemployed in Britain by nineteen-eighty-three just about 
peaked in nineteen-eighty-three unemployment in this country she should have 
lost the eighty-four election or was it eighty-three by a mile given what had 
happened to unemployment it was a million when she came to power by eighty-
three how many was it anybody know four million i think it was 
over four-million in other words there was a huge increase in unemployment the 
British economy which had been growing slowly to nineteen-seventy-nine grew 
hardly at all during those four years and in some years it was backwards lots 
of industries closed down lots of lots of companies shut their doors faced by 
these cripplingly high interest rates and by the massive reduction of aggregate 
demand caused by the rise in interest rates it was a great way to stop 
inflation but it also did terrific er well had a terrific impact on economic 
growth and employment now that's what happened in this country similar things 
happened in other countries an abandonment of Keyensian demand management with 
mac-, with full time er employment full employment as the main objective and 
the assumption of the monetarist objectives of staple money low inflation and 
then let the rest of the economy take care of itself by market forces now in 
nineteen-eighty the American presidential 
election was won by President Reagan and Reagan also had monetarist er economic 
advisers now there was one significant difference between Reagan's 
administration and the British administration President Reagan and Mrs Thatcher 
were very much fellow soulmates politically they agreed on so many things but 
there was one crucial difference in their in in their policy prescriptions and 
that was that whilst Thatcher and Reagan were both extremely hostile to the 
Soviet Union which in nineteen-seventy-nine had sent its troops into 
Afghanistan and believed that the West had to take a very s-, hard line against 
the Soviet Union what happened under Reagan was America began to spend huge 
amounts of money on new defence equipment believing that the Soviet Union was a 
menace er now that money was spent by an American government which did not 
believe in raising taxes indeed President Reagan had told the American people i 
will not raise your taxes now there was a bit of a 
problem there because the American government was already spending more than it 
got on tax revenues in nineteen-eighty and here was a guy spending more on 
defence and promising not to tax the American people the fiscal deficit in 
America grew hugely hugely under Reagan and it was financed not by taxes not by 
the creation of money but it was financed by deficit borrowing and that's by 
issuing U-S Treasury bonds now for people to put their money into U-S Treasury 
bonds you had to offer an attractive rate of interest and what this led to was 
the U-S putting onto the world market treasury bonds at increasingly high rates 
of interest this happened at precisely the same moment that world intr-, er 
world inflation rates were coming down under the impact of monetary policy and 
the combined effect was that real interest rates which had been negative in 
some years in the nineteen-seventies and were consistently under five per cent 
real during the seventies suddenly in 
nineteen-eighty-one those interest rates leapt to ten per cent real or more 
there was a huge increase now you'll see in your notes the example of Mexico 
which in nineteen-eighty-one had a debt of roundabout ninety-billion dollars an 
awful lot of money owed by Mexico before nineteen-eighty-one Mexico was paying 
what what is it in your notes about three per cent on on that debt and had 
therefore to pay debt servicing somewhere between two and three-billions 
dollars a year on a trade balance which generated what about fifteen-billion 
dollars worth of exports in the Mexican economy in the early eighties now debt 
servicing you've you're spending less than three-billions dollars out of 
fifteen-billion dollars coming in sure it hurts you but you've still got a 
large import capacity yeah still a lot of money left to buy the other goods and 
services you want to import nineteen-eighty-one comes and Mexico's average 
interest rate goes from the low rates before to 
around about ten per cent and instead of paying under three-billion dollars a 
year the Mexican government now has to pay nine-billion a year and its total 
export earnings are fifteen so you can see what's happened to the residual 
import capacity it's gone from about twelve-billion dollars to about six-
billion dollars this is a massive shock to the Mexican economy and it is simply 
unsustainable Mexico limps on for the best part of a year desperately trying to 
pay off its debt according to the schedule but in August nineteen-eighty-two 
the Mexican finance minister on a Friday evening sits down with his closest 
advisers looks at the data and says that's it on Monday morning we have to pay 
another two-hundred-million dollars of debt and we simply don't have two-
hundred-million dollars stop worrying stop everything stop paying we can't do 
anything now there's only one decision press notice the Mexican government is 
now suspending debt repayments until 
further notice faced by current positions that press c-, communiquÃ© went out 
that the Mexican government was suspending debt repayments and the world 
financial system at that moment was on the verge of collapse all of the world's 
major banks were massively overexposed on sovereign debt to the developing 
world if you looked at the balance sheets provisions for bad debt against this 
lending zero bank reserves bank capital figure X exposure to third world debt 
figure Y Y is larger than X if all governments had stopped repaying at that 
moment the world's major banks would have gone bankrupt the effect on the 
world's financial system would have been simply catastrophic now what happened 
as a result of that well the cavalry was bou-, brought in and the cavalry was 
the I-M-F and the I-M-F galloped over the hill and said look we'll produce a 
fix and the I-M-F fix went like this they took the banks and said to the banks 
and these are all private banks largely they 
said you must make it easier for the third world governments to repay the debt 
you must extend the periods of repayment give them grace periods do anything 
you can to make it softer and easier for them to repay well the banks of course 
didn't like that because it was going to hit their earnings and profits but the 
I-M-F had got a smoking gun against the temples and said fine if you don't play 
ball you can go bankrupt er you'll be the first ones to suffer in the world 
financial crisis that will ensue so you either play ba-, ball with us or you go 
bankrupt and the banks kicking and screaming said okay we'll play ball and the 
wo-, and the I-M-F said look if you do that we'll stitch up the other side of 
it with the governments in the developing world and what we'll do is we'll make 
sure that they carry on paying as much as they reasonably can er we'll head off 
the possibility of a mass default and what the I-M-F then did is it went all 
over the developing world 
and said the priority now is to get your macroeconomy in a state that you have 
a better macroeconomy better chances of growth and that you can keep paying the 
debt servicing and what they did was they went round the world and they signed 
with government after government structural adjustment agreements so as we come 
into the eighties we're into a world of structural adjustment now structural 
adjustment is a big topic so let's take ten minutes for a coffee break and then 
we'll have a look at what this world of the eighties was and 
nm0969: 
on at slightly less blistering pace than so far those of you who are actually 
trying to follow it in the hand-, er handout where are we up to we're about 
page nine now page nine or so student 
sf0973: which one 
nm0969: well of the many ones handed out last week this is history of history 
of ideas about development and we've reached round about page nine well look 
what we've got in the early nineteen-eighties onwards is structural adjustment 
being more or less forced upon the developing world some countries took a 
stronger objection to the I-M-F than oth-, than than others some countries 
consistently for many years like Tanzania held out against I-M-F orthodox 
advice on macroeconomic management but eventually they were basically forced to 
signed structural adjustment agreements and why was that well from nineteen-
eighty-two onwards from the debt crisis in August eighty-two there was no money 
anywhere in the world system for a poor country in the developing world to 
finance any trade deficit so if you were Tanzania and you'd got problems with 
your trade balance and we'll see in a moment why you would have had problems 
with your trade balance if you were Tanzania in the in the early eighties with 
a with a with a trade balance deficit and you needed to finance it who would 
give you money none of the commercial banks gave any money to the developing 
world for the best part of ten years after the eighty-two debt crisis they got 
such a bad fright by the debt crisis they more or less ceased lending into the 
developing world so the only people who were lending money to governments in 
the developing world from eighty-two onwards were other governments other aid 
agencies and other multilateral agencies like the I-M-F and the World Bank and 
remarkably in the early nineteen-eighties there was an intellectual consensus 
which applied to all of the major 
aid donors called the Washington Consensus and the only aid donors who weren't 
fully signed up to the Washington Consensus were the Scandinavian aid donors 
and the Dutch and then your only other possible source of money anywhere in the 
world was the Soviet Union but the Soviet Union was in such trouble itself with 
its economy in the nineteen-eighties that there were really only about two or 
three countries in the world that the Soviet Union could could s-, give 
significant amounts of aid to one of course was Cuba the other was Nicaragua so 
if you were Tanzania in the early eighties you basically had to do a deal with 
the western aid donors and you wouldn't get money from the British the Germans 
the French or anybody else for that matter unless you could tell the aid 
mission yes we are in agreement with the I-M-F if you asked for money from the 
British for example the British would say well where do you stand on your 
negotiations with the I-M-F and if the I-M-F 
hadn't give Tanzania a clean bill of health don't even think about it sort 
yourself out with the I-M-F then we'll see what we can do for you so the I-M-F 
had got tremendous power in the nineteen-eighties country after country had to 
go to the I-M-F and we may say well why have these countries got a trade trade 
deficit well let's give you three reasons for severe macroeconomic problems in 
the developing world in the early eighties but Tanzania would be a an excellent 
example of this problem number one oil prices which had gone up nineteen-
seventy-three were also hiked up in nineteen-seventy-nine now that price spike 
on oil prices didn't last long by about eighty-five oil prices were moving back 
down and moving back down rather quickly but for a few years in the early 
eighties anybody who imported oil your oil bill had just gone once again 
through the roof and that had pushed you into deficit reason number two primary 
commodity prices which peaked in the early 
nineteen-seventies were on their way down throughout the nineteen-eighties now 
we've got this on a graph somewhere if we can find it er where is it it's in 
your notes at least i think it's in your notes i don't seem to have an overhead 
of it er is it in those notes no it isn't yes it is there you go real commodity 
prices and if you look at those real commodity prices they peak in the early 
seventies er by the en-, by the nineteen-eighty they've shuffled back down and 
you can see that from eighty to eighty-eight they're on their way down down 
down so you've got countries in the developing world which have seen the price 
of their main exported commodities moving downwards er and so you've got for 
any unit volume of exports you've got a reduced export earnings and then you've 
got the effects of stagnation depression and deflation in the industrialized 
countries these countries are all using monetarist policies they're growing 
rather slowly their import capacity has 
been reduced or is not growing as it did demand for imported primaries is going 
down and this is pushing down the primary price and at the same time there are 
politicians in these countries saying well we have to protect our domestic 
industries so you take a country like Bangladesh which in the earl-, in the 
eighties is developing its cotton industry and it finds its possibilities of 
exploiting cheap labour in cotton to for textile exports to Europe or the U-S-A 
is heavily circumscribed by the multifibre agreement which is a bit of trade 
protectionism which makes it very difficult for Bangladesh to export more than 
a certain quota of cotton textiles to the industrialized world so protectionism 
and reduced demand or or s-, or slowly growing demand in the north is making it 
ever more difficult to export from the developing world so you've got the trade 
deficit the falling commodity prices and difficulties of protection on the 
world trade scene hence 
most countries in the developing world well most countries many countries in 
the developing world have got severe trade deficits in the early eighties 
they're also running high rates of inflation and they're also many of them are 
running high rates of fiscal deficit in other words the government is spending 
a lot more money than it brings in in tax revenue and when we look at 
structural adjustment and you'll see it's set out on page ten we've got a 
package of measures which can conveniently be divided into demand side and 
supply side measures or perhaps more accurately divided into stabilization 
measures and supply side measures now your stabilization methods improve the 
balance of trade and do that by devaluing the currency reduce fiscal deficits 
and the main weapon to do that is just cut government spending and reduce 
inflation and for any monetarists that means controlling the money supply and 
above all that means allowing interest rates to rise to 
market clearing levels so macroeconomic stabilization is one demand side of 
structural adjustment the second side is an attempt to improve the conditions 
for growth and that is to be done through the efficient use of resources and 
there you have two elements of it take out price distortions er and you remove 
price distortions by getting rid of the distortion on the exchange rate by 
devaluing get rid of excessive subsidies and get rid of any partic-, 
particularly onerous taxes now many developing countries for various social and 
political reasons have subsidies on things like food electricity urban 
transport sometimes the price of fuel in the agricultural sector fertilizers 
pesticides irrigation water the message from the I-M-F was all of those 
subsidies distort prices and lead to inefficient allocation of resources in the 
economy as well as costing the government a lot of money get rid of them get 
efficiency into the system cut 
onerous taxes where would you have found onerous taxes does anyone know this it 
isn't is it where would you have found peculiarly high rates of taxation in a 
country like Tanzania or in any other developing country in the early eighties 
there were people paying tax rates of forty fifty per cent who any idea counts 
as interesting 
sm0974: would it be multinationals 
nm0969: some multinationals might have got a banging off the tax systems on 
corporate taxes there certainly in the nineteen-seventies some countries had 
tax regimes and investment controls that that that that tried to restrict the 
activities of multinationals they might have but there's another significant 
group who were getting banged by the taxes the answer is small farmers small 
farmers you might say well small farmers paid no taxes well if you check out 
effective tax rates er on anybody exporting cocoa coffee palm oil cotton and so 
on there were various things going on in many developing countries that meant 
that 
export taxes on cash crops the main exports they got at the margin were very 
high indeed and the I-M-F and the World Bank looked at those and said well get 
those taxes down because they're a major disincentive to exporting of course 
there were countries in which the macroeconomic malaise was phenomenal where 
exchange rates were so overvalued that the domestic price of an exported good 
was barely worth sticking it in a handcart classic example is Ghana in the 
early nineteen-eighties when the cedi was overvalued by more than ten times 
hugely overvalued cedi what that meant was that if you were growing cocoa in 
southern Ghana which at that time was one of the world's biggest cocoa 
exporters when the cocoa was sold and it was sold at a dollar price and the 
dollar price was translated back into cedis because the cedi was so strong 
against the dollar you got very very few cedis in your hand and cocoa growers 
looked at it and said is that all i'm getting for a ton of cocoa 
hardly worth me growing the stuff hardly worth cutting it off the trees except 
of course for those Ghanaian farmers who did cut the cocoa off their trees but 
most certainly did not export it through Ghana suddenly in the early eighties 
there were very large increases in cocoa exports from the Cote d'Ivoire to the 
to the west and from er Togo to the east of Ghana and that was nothing to do 
with the farmers in those two other countries there was an awful lot of 
Ghanaian cocoa that walked across the border er so those kinds of distortions 
on the exchange rate and pricing systems get rid of those go for efficient 
prices for best resource allocation and big message here allow the markets to 
function during the nineteen-sixties and s-, nineteen-seventies many developing 
countries had governments that were very distrustful of market forces and you 
can understand that distrust in market forces remember in nineteen-se in the 
early seventies people were very worried about the unequalizing effects of 
rapid economic growth and people feared that free markets would lead to 
inequities and sought to control the markets in various ways 
by the early nineteen-eighties the Washington Consensus argued that the cost of 
controlling markets was very high er that markets might not be perfect but they 
were much preferable to government control and so the argument there was 
liberalize your markets allow people to trade to move government to move er 
goods and services around the economy to er access foreign exchange to access 
credit to set up business to reduce regulations and so on so as to allow 
maximum market enterprise within the economy and the final element of 
structural adjustment is institutional reform reform your economic institutions 
er two elements in here privatization many developing governments world 
governments had large parts of their eco-, economy in state hands operated by 
state corporations that often had many remits 
besides making a profit Tanzania was in dreadful trouble in the early nineteen-
eighties one reason that Tanzania was in dreadful trouble in the nineteen-
eighties was that all formal sector cereals marketing processing distribution 
was in the hands of a very large parastatal called the National Milling 
Corporation now the National Milling Corporation was told by the Tanzanian 
government collect maize down in the bottom left hand corner right hand corner 
anywhere in Tanzania at the same price as you collect that maize in places much 
closer to Dar es Salaam everywhere they had to buy up the maize at the same 
price everywhere i think they also were were forced to distribute fertilizer to 
maize growers at the same price what that meant was that places close to Dar es 
Salaam found that the prices they got were not that great for maize so they 
didn't deliver to the National Milling Corporation places at the far end of the 
country which previously had got a very 
poor price for maize because of their isolation and transport costs suddenly 
were offered a price for maize that more or less ignored the transport costs so 
they grew a lot more delivered it to the N-M-C and then the N-M-C had got eight-
hundred kilometres of trucking this maize to the main consumption points not 
surprisingly the N-M-C began to run big deficits now as a public sector c-, er 
corporation entrusted with a key element in Tanzanian food security it could 
not go bust it had to continue operating the N-M-C had an account at the 
Central Bank in Tanzania and the account was in the red and they just ran 
bigger and bigger overdrafts now if you have a huge parastatal in your economy 
running up a very large overdraft on the Central Bank account what happens to 
your money supply public sector overdrafts at the Central Bank what's happening 
to your money supply what does it do to your money supply any idea well it 
expands it yeah this is money for free all that the 
Central Bank is saying is carry on writing cheques so the N-M-C is writing 
cheques creating shilingis in the Tanzanian economy the money supply is way out 
of control money supply's out of control so inflation is being pushed up 
nominal rate of the Tanzanian shilingi is pegged and if your inflation is 
faster than world inflation and your nominal exchange rate is pegged what 
happens to your real exchange rate goes up your real exchange rate is going up 
shilingi is getting stronger against the dollar year in year out the degree of 
overvaluation gets greater so what does that then mean for a Tanzanian grower 
of cotton or a Tanzanian grower of coffee what it means is in an inflated 
economy you're getting the same number of shilingis for your cocoa for your for 
your coffee and your cotton this year as you did two three years ago inflation 
has eroded the value of those shilingis the real price to you in shilingis of 
your coffee and your cotton is going down 
right same things are happening in Ghana in the early nineteen-eighties so the 
operation of your large parastatal is snookering the whole economy there's a 
whole series of vicious effects here which push you into a bigger and bigger 
mess not surprisingly the I-M-F and the World Bank looked at this kind of thing 
and said for heaven's sake privatize these state enterprises er they're doing 
you no good at all er they're probably inefficient er well it's not obvious 
that they were all inefficient but the general feeling was that government was 
inefficient and they're messing up your economy in all kinds of ways they also 
wanted key economic institutions reforming and those included the tax system 
where the basic message was broaden your tax base and lower the tax rates er if 
you have a wider tax capture you can bring down the rates which was regarded as 
a stimulus to in-, in-, investment and also reform your financial sectors get 
yourself an efficient competitive 
financial sector very ve-, often meant privatizing banks and reducing state 
control of the banking system yeah which was the first Third World country to 
go for a fully liberalized banking system anybody know there was one country 
which ten years before this went for a big experiment in all of these policies 
and liberalized its bank system before almost any other country in the 
developing world did any idea Chile Pinochet's coup of nineteen-seventy-three 
brought to power in in Chile not just a dictatorship but a supply side 
monetarist set of economic advisers known as the Chicago Boys all ex-pupils 
from the University of Chicago where they'd been taught monetarism and free 
market economics implemented in Chile from seventy-three onwards ten years 
before it was done in the rest of the developing world fully liberalized 
financial sector in Chile from the mid-seventies onwards has anybody ever heard 
of what happened to the Chilean financial system in about nineteen-eighty-one 
collapsed massive bank failures huge bailout problems er totally liberalized 
bank sectors 
are a disaster nobody in this room will probably have any knowledge of what 
happened in the Midwest of the U-S-A in n-, in in during the first Reagan 
administration where the savings and loans trusts things a bit like the British 
bo-, building societies were deregulated by the Federal Reserve Bank and just 
told to do finance any way they like with the result that the losses in the 
savings and loans institutions were colossal i think we're talking trillions of 
dollars on losses in the savings and loans scandals of the nineteen-eighties 
fully liberalized financial systems are very very dangerous er so there are one 
or two experiences that pushed that too far but the general idea was to 
dereguli-, regulate and get more efficient financial institutions now those are 
the elements of structural adjustment what you'll find on the next couple of 
pages of your handout 'cause you'll find some of the problems involved in 
structural adjustment we're not going to go through 
all of the problems involved in structural adjustment it's a very big topic but 
let me give you three elements of structural adjustment which are really big 
problems the first is that when you look at the macroeconomic stabilization 
measures such as raising interest rates and cutting government spending these 
are severely deflationary measures they will reduce aggregate demand in the 
economy they will lead to business failures they will lead to unemployment they 
will lead to less business activity and those deflationary elements the 
creation of unemployment loss of demand in the economy and reduced economic er 
activity are major elements there which led people to criticize er structural 
adjustment as a set of measures that would increase poverty in the developing 
world now the I-M-F said okay there are deflationary sides side to it but there 
are supply side measures in there which will get your economy growing and any 
pain that there is in 
structural adjustment will be strictly temporary now that leads us to the 
second problem big problem of structural adjustment and that is that structural 
adjustment is usually not sequenced ideally now in a variant on how many 
economists does it take to change a light bulb er how many people does it t-, 
take to devalue the currency of a country apologies to those of you who've 
heard this at least twice before er how many people does it take to devalue 
you've got nominal exchange rates have i done this even with the undergrads now 
you're smiling as though yo-, i did it last week i m-, might have done it last 
week okay look if you have nominal exchange rates i mean these days most 
countries have now got free exchange rates but in the days that you announced 
the exchange rate how many people does it take and how long does it take to 
devalue a country's 
currency any idea no no idea who would have to make the decision you're in 
Ghana in the early nineteen-eighties and you've decided the cedi is w-, w-, way 
overvalued it's ten cedis to the dollar and it should be a hundred cedis to the 
dollar fine who's going to take that decision who do you need to take a 
decision like that no okay the answer is you you probably need your Minister of 
Finance your Chancellor of the Exchequer you probably need the Governor of the 
Central Bank and you'll probably have to consult senior cabinet colleagues or 
the President of the country so that's what two or three high ranking decision 
makers and a typist right how long does it take to devalue about five minutes 
yes as long as you've reached agreement that you're going to do takes five 
minutes that's all the time it takes to to to write out the press announcement 
that says as from today the government of Ghana redefines the cedi from ten 
cedis to the dollar to a hundred cedis to 
the dollar or whatever it is yeah takes five minutes and takes about three 
people to make the decision similarly if you want to cut the government budget 
you know how quickly can you do that how many people are involved well it's 
maybe a couple of dozen technicians in the Ministry of Finance go through the 
government budget with a red pencil reduce the budgets takes one week at most 
yeah how long on the other hand does it take to privatize a big state 
enterprise yeah er those of you who lived through the British privatizations of 
the nineteen-eighties privatizations of British Gas British Telecom and so on 
even in this country took an army of people to do advertizing tendering 
recruiting shareholders producing documents deciding the form of privatization 
deciding what price you should try and sell things off it's a huge business you 
need an army of civil servants for this Nicaragua in nineteen-eighty decided to 
privatize the major state enterprises 
Nicaragua's a very small country when it drew up a list of state enterprises 
there were three-hundred-and-fifty to be privatized yes now think of all the 
legal documentation and all of the technical work in privatizing those three-
hundred-and-fifty enterprises it's years and years of work it took Mrs Thatcher 
a decade to privatize what the dozen or so biggest public sector utilities in 
this country and that took huge resources so for a developing country to 
privatize it's i-, it's a mountain of work similarly if you're trying to 
liberalize parts of your market economy where you previously had lots of 
regulations and where you don't want to just rip away everything overnight er 
there's a lot of technical work there now the point i'm making is that the 
stabilization measures you can do them very quickly you can cut governments ra-,
you can cut government 
spending rather quickly you can raise interest rates rather quickly the supply 
side liberalization measures the reforms of banking tax systems privatizations 
these take years to do so you've got a lag between those things that tend to 
deflate your economy and those things that give a stimulus to your economy and 
that lag can be quite a long lag it can be five years or more so it's no 
surprise to see that devaluation what the I-M-F claimed would be very short 
term pain has proved to be at least medium term if not long term pain and 
indeed for many countries you'd say where is the e-, where is the light at the 
end of the tunnel and here's a third problem with with structural adjustment 
nm0969: 
now you go to Tanzania and you say that and you go to Uganda and say that and 
then you say the same thing in the Cote d'Ivoire and you say the same thing in 
Colombia and in Costa Rica and El Salvador and Guatemala and Indonesia and so 
on yeah now it makes an awful lot of sense for an El Salvador or a Kenya to 
export more coffee earn more foreign exchange er and balance its trade but what 
happens if all countries producing coffee all produce more coffee at the same 
time well against a demand schedule which is not that elastic the price will go 
down now that diagram that was in the notes of falling primary commodity prices 
one of the elements behind that fall in commodity prices were the efforts of 
countries under structural adjustment to increase the volumes of primary 
exports so an argument that makes perfect sense for one country isn't 
necessarily a good argument for all countries at the same time now that argum-, 
that that problem with the argument is known as the 
fallacy of composition composition agg-, added all together in aggregate it 
isn't good advice for any given country at any one moment it is good advice but 
then all countries were given the same advice at the same time now look on page 
nine you've got a little box called the Washington Consensus and this was an 
intellectual consensus built up in the early nineteen-eighties about what 
development policy should be and it's called the Washington Consensus because 
Washington is where you'll find the World Bank the International Monetary Fund 
er and you'll also find the Inter-American Development Bank and you'll also s-, 
find the U-S government now all of the well not all but many of the people 
defining policy in Washington in the early eighties very powerful people came 
to the same conclusions about what good policy would be in the developing world 
and there it is listed point by point let's have a look what we've got there a 
balanced fiscal budget government 
spends only as much as it takes in tight government spending controls broad 
based tax with low marginal tax rates reform your prices to market based prices 
make real interest rates positive get yourself a stable exchange rate er trade 
liberalization and encouragement of foreign direct foreign investment foreign 
direct investment there's terrific change in fashions from the early seventies 
to the early eighties regarding multinational companies and foreign direct 
investment in the early nineteen-seventies people were very wary of the big 
multinational corporations believing that they were exploitative and through 
transfer pricing mechanisms were taking out bigger profits from the developing 
world than they should have been transfer pricing is where you have a local 
subsidiary of a major multinational and what you do with this is you the 
transfer prices as you transfer goods between elements of the same corporation 
you set the prices internally to your company so that you 
only make profits in countries which have low tax regimes yes now if you set 
this up well you can have a global corporation that makes very little profit in 
countries like Germany and Japan or Sweden and suddenly makes a fortune in the 
Cayman Islands yeah tiny part of the company makes a fortune in the Cayman 
Islands well it was never that naked but what you got your tax lawyers to do it 
was alleged was to make sure that you rack up your profits where the tax rates 
are specially low yeah so you pay very little tax in Sweden and then on your 
big profits in the places where you've got a lot of profit then you pay very 
little tax on that and we know how there i mean that game with taxes exploiting 
the possibilities of realizing your profits in low tax havens is why everybody 
today knows that some of the richest people in the world pay no tax now is that 
true that it's commonly alleged that the richest people in the world pay next 
to no tax yes they live in 
strange places they can't spend too much time in any one one of the major 
cities of the world er they have unusual nationalities unusual residences and 
pay next to no tax on phenomenally high earnings this is what we're told well 
in back in nineteen-seventy th-, this was a big fear and many governments put a 
lot of control on multinational organizations er by the time you get to the 
nineteen-eighties those ideas have been blown away because what people are 
saying by the nineteen-eighties is they're saying hey if you want to have 
something happen in a country maybe you can do it by a government parastatal 
but maybe that government parastatal will be inefficient and if it makes losses 
it'll borrow from the Central Bank expand the money supply and create problems 
for you on the other hand if you will give it this out as a franchise to some 
multinational company they can only er they can only operate if they make 
profits they have to be efficient and if they make 
profits this isn't going to cost your country anything and instead of getting 
debt from overseas to put into state investments that might go bad how about 
foreign direct investment because when one of the big corporations comes to 
invest in your country you don't have debt there's no reason to pay back the 
investment capital sure you'll have repatriated profits but that's only if the 
investment's successful if something goes wrong well the corporation loses not 
the country so by the early eighties you got a f-, you got a set of arguments 
saying foreign investment is a very good thing encouraging get rid of get rid 
of debt bring in foreign investment what else have we got in there in the 
Washington Consensus er a consensus in favour of privatizing state enterprise 
er get the state out of it on the grounds that states are likely to be 
inefficient and on the grounds that state enterprises are likely to be managed 
for as many political objectives as economic objectives 
deregulate your markets including the labour market er this is back to the 
nineteen-thirties if there's a problem of unemployment let the wages go down to 
a market clearing level er sound macroeconomic policy in command and some 
rudimentary social safety nets if there are problems of poverty during 
adjustment throw a bit of money at the problem the World Bank also argued at 
the same time for investments in human capital for reasons that we will see in 
a few moments er and in timing stabilize before you create the conditions for 
growth now that's the Washington Consensus it's about macroeconomic stability 
and it's about trying to get a supply side market based miracle for economic 
growth now what do we need to say for the nineteen-eighties about agriculture 
this is really a story in the nineteen-eighties the big stories are about 
macroeconomic phenomena it's extraordinary how quickly the ideas of the early 
nineteen-seventies stressing equity stressing 
reaching the poorest had put agriculture top of the bill in less than ten years 
agriculture has been wiped out from the policy agenda in favour of 
macroeconomic concerns of the early nineteen-eighties and agriculture is now 
seen as nothing special to any other sector if anything's going to happen in 
agriculture base it on the market base it on efficiency but when people looked 
at agriculture they saw one major problem that was going on and that was this 
the problem of okay the problem of negative protection 
and this is a very very simple argument what was argued was that you there's 
your agricultural supply curve quantity and price then in far too many 
developing countries what you got was negative protection and whereas that 
would be a market price delivering an output of O-A what you got in many 
countries was prices artificially depressed by government policy to a point 
here with a corresponding reduction in output now you look at that and you say 
well what government in their right mind would reduce agricultural prices and 
thereby suppress production that can't be a good thing but think about it any 
country that was worried for example about the price of urban food you might 
try and control the froo-, the food price on behalf of urban workers in the 
desire to keep down wages for your industrialization process you might be 
taxing your export crops very heavily because that's 
the only government revenue you've got in the country is is is to tax the the 
agricultural export taxing your exports effectively brings down the price now 
those things were fairly obvious to most governments what was less obvious to 
most governments was the impact of an overvalued exchange rate and if you 
overvalue your exchange rate you hurt your agriculture in two directions first 
any export crops you've got earn less than they would if you've got a free 
market exchange rate you end up with less local currency per dollar earned in 
your hand than you otherwise would and you put downward pressure on the prices 
of any export crops but you also put downward pressure on any food crops any 
domestic crops why because imports get cheap under an overvalued exchange rate 
a lot er a little of the local currency will buy plenty of dollars and it makes 
imported food cheap and brings down your overall price level so indirectly 
through things like the exchange rate you're bringing 
down the price and because you're bringing down the price you're taking away 
the incentive from agriculture faced by this analysis the World Bank spent most 
of the nineteen-eighties telling people looking at agriculture policy get the 
negative protection out of agriculture and you will deliver a major incentive 
to producers which will largely correct problems you've got of insufficient 
food production insufficient export crop production whatever so that was the 
particular message above all else that was given for the agriculture sector get 
negative protection out there it's a market based measure about the peculiarly 
[cough] effects or price discrimination upon agriculture okay nineteen-eighties 
er what have we got during the nineteen-nineties well ideas haven't changed a 
lot between the eighties and the nineties and current day er the Washington 
Consensus is still largely intact during the nineteen-nineties 
changing ideas about development were much influenced by an examination of the 
historical record for one part for the world and that is during the nineties 
people looked to what had happened in the developing world over the previous 
decade and said structural adjustment in the nineteen-eighties were a lot of 
misery in Africa Africa's per caput G-D-P earnings went down for most countries 
during the nineteen- eighties quite badly down for some some groups of people 
Latin America stood still or went backwards but one part of the world saw 
incredibly fast growth rates and as we mentioned last week that was East Asia 
er south China Hong Kong Singapore Korea but increasingly Indonesia Thailand 
Malaysia all of these countries grew very quickly indeed and they grew they 
were the fastest growing part of the world economy the British economy the 
American economy the German economy didn't do that well in the nineteen-
eighties it was hesitate hesitant growth East Asia on 
the other hand was growing very quickly indeed and that led people in the in 
the nineteen-nineties to sort of say well what did these guys get so very right 
what was what was the wonder element that allowed these countries to grow very 
quickly when other parts weren't and a lot of time was spent in the nineteen-
nineties trying to interpret the so-called East Asian miracle there are big 
disputes about the extent to which the East Asian miracle shows that market 
liberaliza-, liberalism works particularly when you realize that one of these 
countries is China with a highly controlled economy indeed the Japanese have 
never run a purely free market economy neither have the Koreans on the other 
hand Singapore Hong Kong were swashbuckling free market capitalism so there 
were debates about the extent to which state intervention in the free market 
pushed forward the East Asian miracle but nobody disagreed about one element of 
the East Asian miracle and that was investment in 
people country after country in East Asia it was argued had undertaken 
reasonably equitable investments in health care education and training of 
people in those countries and it was argued that this was a major stimulus to 
industrialization in this area that you could always hire a lot of people at 
low labour rates but who were in reasonably good health who were literate and 
had reasonable skills and that that was a difference between East Asia for 
example and Africa and Latin America or a difference for that matter between 
East Asia and South Asia India for example has concentrated its educational 
spending on elite facilities with the result that India has more PhDs than any 
country on Earth far more than the Chinese er it was argued in China on the 
other hand the distribution of education had been much broader with the result 
that this large set of people who'd been in the Chinese countryside with 
relatively low marginal products as i said last week 
this is the Lewis argument had moved into export processing zones and con-, and 
and and er manufacturing industry in Shanghai Canton Fujian the coastal area of 
South China and were highly employable er in ways that you couldn't do quite 
the same out of rural India so there was a lot of interest there in in in human 
capital and the advantages of investing in people now there's plenty more we 
can say about the ni-, the nineties and there are parts of this story which we 
still need to revisit and then there's all of the rest of the stuff that i 
hoped we might have had a a go at today er what we're going to have to do is er 
put the whole sequence of these talks backwards once next week we'll be 
continuing with this because we'll need at least another session to get through 
it er before we get to the land talks so next week we'll carry on with this one 