nm1123: over the last two weeks we've been talking about democracy we've been 
talking about the state as part of a series of lectures on the politics of 
modern society now we move to a er er er er an aspect of politics which is not 
directly involved in the state but w-, is seeking to influence the state with 
what are called social movements it's perhaps best just to to give you some 
names to illustrate what we're talking about we're talking about the peace 
movement we're talking about the woman's women's movement we're talking about 
the socialist movement the movement for civil rights the movement for animal 
rights now there's enormous variation in the form of social movements those of 
you who might be members of a trade union or a political party do you want to 
pick one of those up 
sf1124: sorry 
nm1123: [sniff] will er will know that they can take an extremely bureaucratic 
form in which the powers of committees and whatnot are closely defined 
alternatively if you've engaged in 
er in direct action er to stop er calves being exported er alive to the 
continent or something like that then you'll know that er the form of 
organization is extremely loose and network based so there's a great debate 
about how we define social movements if you look in the the the textbook that 
we use in this course one of the more disappointing chapters there is on social 
movements i don't particularly recommend that because it seems to me to become 
er convoluted into a debate about how we define a social movement so to cut 
through all of that i use a nice straightforward definition which we've got 
here forms of po-, popular organization which have their basis outside the 
political system but which seek to influence the political system in the 
direction of their cause so we've got the idea of popular organization a basis 
outside the political system we've got secondly the idea of seeking to 
influence politics rather than join politics and we've 
got er thirdly the idea of a cause of seeking d-, a a movement for something 
sometimes a movement against something now until fairly recently it seemed that 
one particular so-, social movement the labour movement seemed to have some pre-
eminence er in er among social movements in terms of size and scale er degree 
of organization er the the labour movement made up of trade unions cooperative 
parties er political parties and all sorts of of other associated er er 
groupings seemed to have a pre-eminence and so i'll start my lecture by talking 
about a theory of the labour movement and then er a sort of lock lack of of 
confidence about the labour movement which set in er during the nineteen-
seventies so i'll outline a theory and then i'll outline some er scepticism 
from within er the labour movement about that theory and then to conclude the 
lecture we'll move on to a different kind of theory the theory of so-called new 
social movements which claims er that either 
the pre-eminence of the labour movement has now declined and there it's just 
one amongst many or a more radical version of the theory is that the labour 
movement is now er an anachronism and has been overtaken by new social 
movements okay so let's start then with the classic theory of the labour 
movement the source that i'm i-, going to use here is er er the accessible 
sourc-, source that er i've introduced you to already er Marx and Engels The 
Communist Manifesto this is a a nice neat statement of the theory of the labour 
movement but what i want to stress is that this is not a particularly Marxist 
theory this is a a theory shared well beyond Marxism within other branches of 
of the labour movement so let's er just state the theory the first point to 
state about it is the idea of historical inevitability the inevitability of A 
some kind of movement generated within modern societies which will lead B to 
the demise of the the current forms of society and the 
movement on to a new and different and better kind of society within Marxism 
the idea of a shift from capitalism to communism and that being linked not just 
to something which was good about communism but also the the workings the 
mechanisms of capitalist society in Marx's famous phrase would generate the 
gravediggers of the capitalist system the labour movement is precisely that 
gravedigger that out of capitalism would come a mechanism of change which would 
lead on to a different kind of society secondly let's talk about the process of 
labour movement growth the idea is that the labour movement grows out of the 
everyday experience of people in modern society the everyday experience of the 
deprivations of work poverty problems with housing dah-di-dah-di-dah but that 
that would grow in three different ways first of all spatially it would grow 
from groups of workers coming together in a workplace and thinking we're being 
done here we're being er exploited 
here and they got together t-, er t-, er at the workplace level and and tried 
to do something about it but it moved from that level spatially to the idea of 
the regional trade union and then the national trade union and then 
international workers so the idea is that spatially the labour movement grows 
from everyday experience of problems in in capitalist society into a national 
and indeed international movement secondly the idea of er of organizational 
expansion again the idea is that er everyday experience would lead to the the 
formation of trade unions trade unions would grow into a national movement they 
would then grow into a political movement or merge with a political movement 
and that would lead to er er a mechanism for change so organizationally there's 
that idea of expansion out of everyday experience and then thirdly at the level 
of the individual the idea is that people's moans and groans would er m-, er 
move on from moaning and groaning about your 
particular boss or your particular supervisor er to thinking well it's not just 
me that has this problem i'm in the same boat as other people we all form part 
of first of all the trade or the industry and then the penny drops in according 
to the theory we're all part of a class er and the labour movement er is based 
upon the idea of class solidarity so that's the second aspect of the theory 
that er out of everyday experience in these different ways a movement would be 
generated er er which was large-scale er in terms of space in terms of 
organization and in terms of aspiration of individuals from just solving 
everyday problems to looking forward to a new form of society and then the 
third thing about the theory is its politics the claim is that the labour 
movement is confrontational it is not just a movement which seeks to enter 
politics on the same terms of as what are called bourgeois parties rather it is 
a er a political movement that seeks to enter the 
political arena to confront that political arena and move beyond it to a 
different kind of society the labour movement er er has an aspiration to m-, to 
er to change society in fundamental ways so that is or those are the main 
elements of the theory we'll see if i can get this lined up so that's the 
theory then what about the experience of th-, er th-, the labour movement and 
its history well prior to the First World War prior to nineteen-fourteen that's 
that theory seemed to be working out very well if we take a er the ec-, ec-, 
example of both the United States and Europe then workers' movements did seem 
to be developing spatially organizationally and in terms of class consciousness 
trade union movements had grown had become united as movements and had linked 
up with socialist movements and formed political parties which were entering 
the political arena in Germany er for example in the Social 
Democratic Party on a specific platform that we are not here to collaborate 
with you our oppressors we are here to get rid of you so up until nineteen-
fourteen the the-, the the theory seemed to be working but from the First World 
War the theory went wrong experience departed from the theory it went wrong in 
two different ways first of all there was a divergence in the i-, in er in the 
form of the labour movement the labour movement took two different routes the 
first route exemplified by the nineteen-seventeen revolution and the formation 
of the Soviet Union was the Communist Party route that route er saw 
confrontational politics as based upon a c-, a violent confrontation with the 
state violent revolution the taking power taking of power through the state and 
the imposition of a social blueprint of a communist society so that was one 
route forward that actually happened but secondly there is a second route 
forward again which actually happened what 
i'll call the social democratic route everyone turned the page [laugh] [cough] 
within er Western Europe violent revolution did not occur but by the exp-, ex-, 
expansion of the franchise and the formation of social democratic parties such 
as the Labour Party in Britain Social Democratic Party in Germany er not not so 
clear in in France but similarly in in Sweden a-, again the Social Democratic 
Party what one had was er a route forward a route forward for the labour 
movement not based upon overthrow of the state but the use of er electoral 
power to gain access to the state and the and the proclamation that that access 
could use er parliamentary strength political strength to fundamentally change 
capitalist societies so that was the first thing that went wrong the theory 
didn't predict some kind of divergence along these two er very different paths 
then the second thing that went wrong with the theory was that in each of these 
two different cases the more that 
either form of political expression became successful in inverted commas the 
more it seemed to depart from the ideals of socialism so in the Soviet Union 
the longer the experience of the er of the Soviet system er er went on the more 
it seemed that the Soviet Union became an increa-, increasingly bureaucratized 
increasingly totalitarian increasingly er militaristic society in which the 
experience of workers seemed to be little different to the experience of 
workers under capitalism so the greater the power of the the Communist Party in 
the Soviet Union the greater seemed to be the disillusionment in terms of the 
er the c-, the criterion of achieving a socialist society similarly if we look 
at the second road sometimes called the parliamentary road to er to socialism 
via social democratic parties again the more successful these parties became 
the more they seemed to depart from socialism in this particular case what 
we're talking about is the more 
that social democratic parties er gained political power and used political 
power the more they seemed to be not doing away with so w-, with capitalism but 
depending upon capitalism the classic case i suppose will be Sweden in which 
from the nineteen-thirties through to the nineteen-seventies you had a er a 
permanent er er er social democratic government and yet er the great er er er 
capitalist firms of er of Sweden Volvo Ericsson er there's one other make they 
make er hoovers and and 
sm1125: Electrolux 
nm1123: Electrolux [laughter] er those three er er international firms er seem 
to be er er strengthened under Swedish er socialism rather than er un-, bu-, 
rather than overthrown by a socialist government so we have this er dilemma 
then the theory seemed to work up until it actually seemed to be coming to er 
to success in which er political parties from the labour movement put it into 
practice this theory actually came into power then it all seemed to go wrong 
whichever of 
these two routes we looked at so why well just as a as a er a little 
introduction to this this theory of the labour movement that i've been putting 
forward has been criticized i-, in many ways right from the start it's been 
criticized by without the labour movement from wou-, outside the labour 
movement by what are often referred to from within as bourgeois theories some 
of you will be becoming aware of the work of Max Weber er Max Weber er er Max 
Weber's work has often been er desc-, d-, des-, described as a debate with the 
ghost of Marx a putting forward of an alternative theory of society to that 
developed by Marxism pick up one of those another example will be Karl Popper 
er well known er well Austrian by origin but er er f-, for many years British 
based er philosopher who wrote a book er called The Poverty of Historicism 
being a critique of Marxism another example is Hayek's book The er Roads to 
Freedom now these are er critiques of er this theory of the labour 
movement from outside the labour movement and secondly there've been debates 
within the labour movement er what i put down here debates within these 
assumptions of the labour movement about quite how to er er how to advance the 
the er interests of the movement but from around nineteen-seventy what started 
to emerge were critiques of the labour movement so to speak from within looking 
at those basic propositions that i outlined at the beginning of the talk and 
saying well there's something wrong with them and what i'll do now is now to er 
is to look at three examples of such critiques of the labour movement which 
were generated from within that labour movement er i think all three authors er 
are politically associated with the left er Eric Hobsbawm until at least very 
recently maintained his membership of the Communist Party of Great Britain er 
AndrÃ© Gorz was a member of the French 
Communist Party er to i'm not sure about Adam Przeworski's er political 
allegiances but the his book is clearly from the left but these er left wing or-
, or-, oriented authors er mounted critiques of this theory of the labour 
movement so let me try to er take you through the basic ideas in these 
critiques Hobsbawm's er er paper The Forward March of Labour Halted question 
mark has the forward m-, march of labour halted was er first published in 
nineteen-seventy-eight and it er was offered as er the Marx memorial lecture 
first of all so that it very much epitomized this idea of er a critique from 
within it puts forward two basic propositions first of all it puts forward the 
idea that up until around nineteen-fifty the trend of development of the labour 
movement was toward the greater er homogeneity of the working class in terms of 
work experience in terms of lifestyle in terms of political awareness the 
proposition is fut put 
forward by er by Hobsbawm that there was an increasing what he called 
proletarianization of working class life in support of that he m-, he makes the 
point that most most workers up to that time were increasingly male 
increasingly manual mm there's another characteristic and i can't just think 
we'll just leave it at male and manual ah white is the other criterion [laugh] 
most most workers were white male and manual workers and based upon that the 
experience of work and of their of these these people's families Hobsbawm 
claims that there was a a trend towards what he calls the er this 
proletarianization of life a common experience of life now from around nineteen-
fifty he claims that that common experience has changed direction towards a 
greater heterogeneity of experience and he puts forward the claim that the 
workforce has become inclease-, increasingly differentiated rather than focused 
upon white male manual workers we have er in European countries 
er the growth of a discriminated minority of ethnic minority workers we have 
the growth during this period of female workers and we have the growth of er 
white-collar workers and Hobsbawm claims that that has er broken away from this 
trend towards er a common experience towards a differentiation of experience 
his second idea is about labour labour movement leadership now there have 
always been differences and er conflicts within the labour movement for example 
er er throughout the nineteenth century and throughout the first half of the 
twentieth century the division between skilled workers and unskilled workers 
has been a fundamental source of of er of tension within the labour movement 
with er skilled workers in particular attempting to defend their privileges as 
much against unskilled workers as against their employers however Hobsbawm 
wants to argue that although there were these tensions and these differences 
the skilled elite of the labour movement up until 
around nineteen-fifty if you like the privileged er sections of the labour 
movement did provide er a political leadership for the for the movement as a 
whole we could take for example the issue of pensions pensions for old people 
during the nineteenth century up until er nineteen-o-nine er privileged skilled 
workers developed a form of pension provision for themselves their friendly 
societies whereby they put subscriptions in during their working life and then 
were entitled to take er benefits out when they are retired now this was very 
much a privilege of skilled workers a great advantage but it did not stop er 
the same skilled workers being at the er in the vanguard of a movement to for 
for the state to intervene with a some kind of national scheme of pension 
provision for the elderly so that indicates the the idea that er prior to 
nineteen-fifty in Hobsbawm's view a labour elite provided a class leadership 
for the working class as a whole again 
his claim is that after that time he's not precise you can't put d-, this down 
to a particular date October the fourteenth nineteen-forty-nine or something 
but from around that sort of time he sees er the privileged sections of the 
labour movement not as providing leadership but as entering into er an internal 
competition with other groups in the labour movement particularly over wages so 
the privileged groups of the period from nineteen-fifty t-, through to the 
nineteen-seventies in particular mine workers er car workers transport workers 
er those three groups in particular Hobsbawm sees as not providing leadership 
but h-, he sees them as entering into a sectional competition to keep ahead in 
the wages league so this is Hobsbawm's analysis that until up until the period 
just after the Second World War this trend towards homogeneity this trend 
towards forward movement led by the privileged section of the working class 
switches into a trend towards 
heterogeneity of the working class and secondly sectional competition within it 
that was er Hobsbawm's analysis which clearly means that the labour movement is 
not going to be this force for er political change er that er the theory er er 
claimed m-, moving on to my my second example of this kind of theory er AndrÃ© 
Gorz's book Farewell to the Working Class again the title gives the game away 
this is say this is Gorz as i said earlier a member of the French Communist 
Party er saying the working class thing of the past bye bye his analysis is 
based upon again er an analysis of the trend of development of the post-war 
working class and he sees the the working class as marked by a basic division 
the division goes along these lines on the one hand we have those workers who 
had become locked into the large work organization the large private company 
the large public company or pub-, public organization a bank would be a nice 
example large employer lots of er er in many 
ways proletarianized workers but each of those workers is becomes a cog in a 
complex bureaucratic system now at this point er Gorz introduces a contrast 
between er such cogs in a bureaucratic machine and the skilled craftworker his 
idea is that if you work in a bank or a hospital or a large er private company 
then you become extremely skilled but what you become skilled in is operating 
in that kind of environment it's as if we take er say a radiogra-, radiographer 
in a hospital a very skilled job but a radiographer needs skills in operating a 
particular machinery the X-may X-ray machines but also in coordinating with all 
kinds of departments of a hospital and other er professionals and semi-
professionals in the hospital skill does not mean that you can start from some 
basic raw materials and finish up with some er finished er product now this is 
the er the contrast with the the craftworker the idea was in the past let's say 
a carpenter could start 
with some pieces of wood and finish up with er a er er er a beautiful object of 
furniture now Gorz claims that if you're a craftworker you can see all the 
processes of production and you can also see how it's possible to do it all 
yourself or in collaboration with other workers in other words it's possible to 
do it outside the organization and outside the the control of capital his idea 
is that if you're a radiographer how can you possibly do that job outside of 
the hospital or if you are are a er er some kind of of skilled operator within 
a car plant let's say operating er one of these hugely expensive er er ro-, 
automated machines how can you possibly do that outside the the the the 
organization of the er of the car plant so the idea is that these these er this 
half of the working class is locked into a form of organization in which in a 
sense they're in a rut and they can't see out of the edge of the rut there's no 
perspective onto alternative forms of organization 
so that's one half of er of Gorz's analysis the other half is about the other 
half of the working class who Gorz calls the non-class of non-workers [laugh] 
the people here he's referring to here are people who hold temporary jobs 
people who are at the margins of the labour market in terms of er frequent 
experiences of unemployment and then short term employment people who are er 
depend for much of their working life upon benefits he claims that the working 
class has been split between er organizational workers that i talked about a 
moment ago and these non-class of non-workers what does he mean by non-workers 
he means they're non-workers in the sense that work does not become part of 
individual identity people d-, don't become miners or carpenters or 
radiographers because one year they might be picking fruit er er during the 
summer er that then the next summer they might be er er working as a coach 
hostess on Harry Shaw's trips to the er er to the Mediterranean er and that's 
taken from a particular interview i had with er [laugh] with a a a non-worker 
who was flitted from one kind of work to another so that notion of occupational 
identity who i am in work terms doesn't develop and secondly this is a non-
class of non-workers because the conditions of employment of such workers are 
so competitive that each worker has to look out for his or herself there's no 
sense of er a common class identity and class solidarity so for Gorz again the 
structure of the working class has been restructured in the recent period 
dividing the working class along these lines and in each case moving it away 
from some er er association with a movement beyond capitalism to another 
society for our workers who are locked into large organizations their skills 
seem to be dependent upon that kind of organization for those er on the the 
more fringes of the labour market er there's no sense of the centrality of work 
experience and no sense of er a common 
experience which moves everyone forward my third example is taken from a book 
by Adam Przeworski i'm not sure if i pronounced that right but it it does it 
it's a Polish name and to me it sounds sort of Polish like that so if any of 
you er speak Polish or have Polish ancestry my apologies if i have made a 
complete arse of how to pronounce this Polish word [laugh] but i will call him 
Przeworski this is a theory about not the changing structure of the working 
class but about social democratic parties those parties which took that second 
route that i mentioned earlier er along the parliamentary road based upon the 
increasing electoral presence of the working class forming political parties on 
a mass basis entering the the the the realm of representative er democracy 
Przeworski's er question is why hasn't haven't those parties implemented the 
socialist ideal of creating a socialist society rather than a a a a 
capitalist society that er yeah er now i just want to include a point there 
that i haven't got got here Przeworski points out that from the nineteen-
twenties right through to the current period where er as you possibly know 
virtually all of Europe is now er er governed by er parties supposedly on the 
left of the political spectrum over all that period there doesn't seem to have 
been any er undermining of capitalism social democratic parties seem to have 
come into power held power for long periods of time but er er don't seem to 
have er done the business in terms of delivering something called socialism as 
opposed to capitalism a nice example that Przeworski uses is that in Germany in 
France and in Britain in the interwar period social democratic parties did hold 
political power at er for some er crucial points in time and yet with the 
exception of a small part of the French armaments industry not one industry was 
nationalized during the interwar period so 
he he throws up the the prob-, problem well why why don't social democratic 
parties deliver something called socialism and his answer has three component 
parts first of all about the working class and the electorate this particular 
path toward a socialist society depended upon the idea that as the electorate 
grew as the franchise was extended to the working class and to women then the 
working class would become the majority of the electorate and through from that 
majority position they would be in a position to take political power now this 
depends upon how you define the working class but most labour movements were 
based upon er a core of er o-, er er er of m-, of of membership and allegiance 
from manual workers and from about nineteen-fourteen whilst the electorate grew 
the place of manual workers in the overall electorate gradually declined what 
one had was a decline in the manual workforce and on either flank of the manual 
workforce what you 
had was a growth of two different kind of constituencies on the one hand the 
poor the people who are not er locked into the labour market either because 
they were children or old people or they were disabled or they're unemployed er 
the multiple reasons for for for poverty but that became er a s-, a section of 
the electorate who were not well integrated into the labour movement on the 
other flank of the labour movement are what we might broadly call the wor-, the 
the middle class white-collar workers er er i-, in particular and so what 
social democratic parties had to do was to broaden their electoral appeal 
beyond their natural basic constituency of the the unionized er manual 
workforce they had to appeal to the poor on the one hand and the middle classes 
on the other so that nice simple idea that as the electorate grew so the er the 
the the the proportion of manual workers in the electorate would grow er was 
not borne out by experience so just as the l-, the 
Labour Party and New Labour today have to appeal to what was called Middle 
England so in the nineteen-twenties and thirties er social democratic parties 
had to appeal electorally to a constituency wider than if you like their 
organizational class base this is not a new phenomenon er of the nineteen- 
eighties and nineties this is a er in Przeworski's view a recurrent feature of 
social democratic parties the second reason he offers for social democratic 
parties not delivering socialism is that when they came into power they didn't 
know what to do [laughter] the idea here is that socialism was a motivating 
vision but had very little in the way of practical policies as to how to move 
from that motivating vision to how actually to implement er socialism in this 
sense they are very different from er from the the Communist Party in the 
Soviet Union where the er er the the Bolsheviks as a as a small if you like 
professional elite of revolutionaries had w-, worked 
out in considerable detail what they would do once they took power in a sense 
they didn't expect to take power so they could spend all their time working it 
out [laugh] but er er when the Communist Party grasped power in er in Tzarist 
Russia then er er there was a blueprint as to what to do in terms of setting up 
Soviets in terms of er er er coordinating industry all of this and the social 
democratic equivalent er wasn't there so this leads us into the third point 
that what was there was something that looked like a possible alternative what 
people called Keynesianism this is from er the s-, the economic and political 
theories of John mar-, Maynard Keynes and in the nineteen-thirties Keynes had 
been er putting forward er a theory of how the a capitalist economy could work 
so long as certain things happened this was in response to the crisis of 
capitalism of er of the Great Depression and Keynes had developed an 
alternative way of er of how the modern 
economy could work what these depen-, depended upon you don't have to know the 
details of of Keynes' economic theories the key ideas was the key ideas were A 
that for a modern economy to work the state had to adopt an interventionist 
role a free market would lead to the disaster of the Great Depression states 
had to intervene in the workings of the economy and the key idea was that they 
had this is the second key idea was that states had the responsibility of 
maintaining overall demand in the economy now what this actually meant when you 
worked it through was that Keynesianism meant that the state had to engage in 
some degree of redistribution of wealth and resources in the economy so in 
order to maintain demand for example you had to have er sta-, state benefit 
systems er which would give some dema-, some purchasing power to the poor to 
maintain overall demand what it involved was er er mai-, mai-, intervening to 
some extent in the workings of 
the labour market through er er labour exchanges and er u-, unemployment 
benefit and making sure that people were were er mobile within within the 
labour market what it meant thirdly was some degree of state intervention to er 
to generate social goods social goods er such as er education or health in er 
to maintain overall demand and to er red-, redistribute wealth i-, in these 
kind of ways now from the perspective of social democratic parties that didn't 
really know what to do to move to socialism this seemed a very attractive 
option it involved er some very concrete policies that would be of er of use in 
to the the constituency that social democratic parties were appealing to to the 
poor to the working class a national health service for example it formed a 
basis for bringing together this these three different constituencies of the 
poor the organized working class and the middle class so the investment in in 
er in an education for example an education 
system gave some educational opportunities to the children of the poor to the 
children of the working class and at the same time it gave professional 
advantages to this growing army of teachers and educationalists er and 
university lecturers as well er er who would benefit from the growth of a state 
system of education so hunky-dory the problems of social democratic er er er 
parties about on the one hand first of all appealing to a broad electorate and 
secondly er knowing what to do seemed to be answered by Keynesianism there was 
only one problem Keynesianism was not a route out of capitalism the whole 
system was set up in order to regenerate and ensure the continued health of a 
capitalist economy so what social democratic parties became er locked into was 
not moving beyond capitalism but managing capitalism and making sure that some 
of the messes of capitalism er were were at least ameliorated so that's 
Przeworski's again int-, internal 
critique of the theory of the labour market looking at social democratic 
parties and how they become er embroiled within er capitalist societies rather 
than er working for their change now for the third part of the lecture i want 
to move from a focus upon the labour movement and its dilemmas and problems on 
to a different kind of theory er it's er often called the theory of new social 
movements on the er on the reading list that you've got er a nice example of 
this is by two people called Eyerman and Jamieson er just so you can locate it 
in terms of the reading oof dear right now if we go back to the historical 
experience of social movements whilst the er the labour movement in the post-
war period might have been experiencing all these dilemmas and quandaries that 
i've been 
talking about other social movements seem to be flourishing in the nineteen-
fifties we have the peace movement with the first version of C-N-D the Campaign 
for Nuclear Disarmament in er in in Britain in the United States we have the 
beginnings of the civil rights movements particularly for er black people in 
the United States as we move into the nineteen-sixties [cough] we have the 
beginnings of er er er of of of a a new pacifist movement particularly 
stimulated by er the Vietnam War and opposition to the Vietnam War and toward 
the end of the sixties we have the rebirth of a feminist movements for women's 
li-, rights as we get into the seventies this moves out into ac-, increasing 
concern with problems with the environment so we have er Greenpeace Friends of 
the Earth er all sorts of activist er movements on behalf of the environment 
for animals and dah-di-dah so er the idea took hold with people thinking about 
these er the-, these kind of of experiences these kind of of 
social movements that something different was happening that these were new 
social movements and there w-, there was a contrast between these new movements 
and the old social movements particularly the labour movement so the theory 
first of all claims that there is such a division there are old movements 
particularly epitomized by the labour movement and there are new movements 
epitomized by the kind of er of issue issue led campaigns that i've just been 
mean-, mentioning have i missed anyone out peace movements nuclear anti-nuclear 
environmental ism feminism civil rights so a contrast between new and old 
secondly was a claim that the labour movement had become er had played its part 
in the development of the modern world the labour movement had pa-, been part 
of the growth of er shaping the modern state if we take the idea of the modern 
state as having reforming responsibilities that if we need something done then 
we try to get the state to do 
something about it the labour movement had shaped the state in that respect 
seeing the state as not just a er what we might call the er sometimes call the 
police state not in a sense of er Pinochet kind of s-, police states but police 
in the sense of a minimalist role for the state to maintain law and order 
within and to maintain good relations without the state had become an 
interventionist state for reform and the labour movement had er become er had b-
, played its part in shaping the modern state the labour movement had played 
its part in defining er voluntary er institutions like trade unions like 
political parties how they operated er was very much er er er er er er a a a 
result of the labour movement's efforts over several decades and the labour 
movement had also er finally been associated with the er modernist er 
underlying belief that science can save us that from scientific knowledge we 
can solve all our problems whether they be problems about our 
health our environment er how we er teach people how we bring up children 
science is the er root of all knowledge you might er er be aware that Marx and 
Engels called their their er form of socialism scientific socialism it was also 
the case that in the the British Labour Party in the nineteen-forties that 
implemented a whole raft of nationalizations of industry the justification for 
that was was was not in terms so much in terms of socialism as in terms of 
national efficiency approaching the pro-, the the the the question of how you 
dig ma-, coal out of the ground scientifically so the the labour movement had 
be-, had taken upon er the the taken upon itself the rhetoric of er of a 
scientific basis for society so in these three different ways from the point of 
view of this theory the labour movement is associated with basic er 
institutions and cultures of the modern world that leads onto the third er part 
of the theory from the perspective of new social 
movements what this means is that the labour movement is not against the modern 
world it is part of the problem of the modern world so whether we look at say 
trade unions whose members work within the nuclear industry whether we look at 
social democramic gratic-, parties that er that that er er are are responsible 
for welfare systems that discriminate against women then what the labour 
movement looked like from the point of view on one hand of anti-nuclear 
demonstrators or on the other hand of of feminist de-, demonstrators was er 
that that the labour movement was part of the opposition to er what they were 
seeking to achieve and so the idea is that these new social movements are not 
just new in a sort of temporal sense that they emerged in the the nineteen-
sixties and seveties er as latecomers to the social movement scene they're also 
new in that they develop forms of politics which are e-, entirely different to 
old social movements the three 
points that we can bring in here are A B and C let me first of all just use an 
illustration can you see this photograph er this is a photograph of the 
Greenham Common women who er as you can see associated themselves with the C-N-
D but also with the feminist movement this was a photograph taken in the 
nineteen er er n-, in nineteen-eighty-three er it's a sit-down protest outside 
the Greenham Common er American Air Base er a confrontation with the police 
force er this seemed to me to be a nice illustration of several of the points 
that i'll make er about er about new social movements er the first is that new 
social movements do not seek political power they seek to influence those who 
hold power so these women here are not er attempting to get themselves elected 
they are attempting to influence public opinion er in the in the direction of 
the dangers of er of nuclear weapons er located er i-, i-, in Britain secondly 
that kind of political influence is not so 
much in terms of well let's sep-, set up an Act of Parliament to regulate 
nuclear power it's rather to try to er shift public opinion in terms of 
lifestyles to get people to think well eating meat is not what a civilized 
person does smoking cigarettes in public is not acceptable in a civilized 
society driving motorcars and polluting the atmosphere is something that we 
ought to feel fu-, fundamentally guilty about locating er nuclear missiles in 
the English countryside is not publicly accessible the idea was that through 
such forms of direct action the agenda of politics would be shifted er in terms 
of popular perceptions of what's acceptable and what's not sa-, not acceptable 
a nice example would be er er the w-, the way in which we er we er er 
stereotypically can present women er in public er in the in the present period 
to er represent women as either er er the housewife or the bimbo is generally 
speaking not acceptable there are of course limits to that er 
if you read the Sun news-, newspaper or whatever but er the the fate of the 
Miss World competition is a nice example where it became er er unacceptable to 
parade women in a beauty contest on er main-, mainstream television so it's 
that kind of of political influence that new social movements are are 
attempting to shift the agenda of politics and the third aspect of new social 
movements in according to the theory is that they reject bureaucracy and 
representative politics in favour of a loose participatory network of 
organization none of these women were members of some er of some organization 
they didn't pay subscriptions they didn't have a secretary or a treasurer or a 
chairperson er they were members of a loose network of people who were 
concerned about this and who came together er for their stint at Greenham 
Common on er an informal basis finally let me offer some er critical thoughts 
on the theory oops 
wrong bit on the the theory of neo-, new social movements the first criticism 
takes objection to the er to the description new social movements the concerns 
of er feminism environmentalism er the civil rights movement er anti-war 
movements these are not new neither are social movements concerned with these 
issues clearly in the late nineteenth century the first wave of feminism was a 
major social movement prior to the First World War there was a considerable 
pacifist movement within Europe as the build-up to the First World War took 
place over a about a twenty year period a nice example is environmentalism 
throughout the nineteenth century there was a concern about the pollution of 
the environment by er industry and particularly by the city and all sorts of er 
of er of movements to preserve the countryside er er d-, were were were 
developed that led to the er the the idea of town 
planning now just because town planning became in a sense part of er the modern 
system of bureaucratic regulation doesn't mean to say that environmentalism is 
a new issue the garden city movement of the nineteenth century was just as much 
a an active concern with the with the environment as the the modern concern 
about industrial pollution so none of these movements are new they are er new 
editions if you like of old movements the second point is that this 
characterization of the political role of new social movements is idealized and 
er er and a-, and doesn't correspond with the facts lots of feminists lots of 
civil rights activists do become involved in organized politics indeed when i 
was looking out at my my pictures today a frequent picture er which occurred in 
my on my computer screen er as i was hunting through for feminism and civil 
rights and things like this was the face of Ellen Wilkinson many of you perhaps 
haven't 
heard of Ellen Wilkinson Ellen Wilkinson was a er is the the the the one woman 
who is responsible for what we now call child benefits what used to be called 
family allowances she was the person in the nineteen-thirties and the forties 
who worked for the idea of [laughter] wages for women and er er a f-, a f-, a 
feminist ideal which Ellen Wilkinson er worked for through the labour movement 
and through the Labour Party so er similarly we've had recent er m-, many 
examples of people associated with the feminist movement becoming involved in 
electoral politics many people involved with the civil rights movement er in 
America for example becoming part of the Democratic Party er the Reverend je-, 
er Jesse Jackson is perhaps the best known example so this idea that new social 
movements are detached from politics is er is one particular er political 
expression there are many other political expressions of er concerns 
with these this e-, these issues and thirdly the the third critique of er of 
this er i-, i-, of this theory is that in many cases in the past these 
supposedly new issues have been articulated through the labour movement so for 
example prior to the First World War to be a socialist meant you were also a 
pacifist the two almost went together similarly the issue of women's rights has 
been debated in the labour movement ever since the time of Chartism in the 
eighteen-thirties and forties whether the charter should should appeal for u-, 
u-, a universal franchise or simply an adult male franchise and this has been a 
issue within the labour movement for at least a hundred-and-fifty years now 
what has happened in the er in the recent past is the detachment of some of 
these issues from that involvement with the labour movement so that labour 
movement er environmental movement feminist movement have been to some degree 
detached but this does not mean in my view that er i-, either these issues 
either that these issues are new nor that they have nothing to do with the 
labour movement so i think basically there are fundamental flaws in this idea 
that the the labour movement is now an old movement which has been surpassed by 
new social movements okay that's just about done it in the time so er er i 
think we'll draw to a close now and er i'll see you next week 