hello my dudes my name is Tiffany
welcome back to my series internet
analysis where I like to research and
discuss things relevant to social issues
and media today I want to discuss the
importance of deleting old posts now I
have to admit today's gonna be a little
less of internet analysis and more like
analyze your own internet if that makes
sense let's jump right in
I tend to be a very nostalgic person I
like to keep everything and that has
definitely extended into my digital life
I've had various social media accounts
for over a decade now and I've just kind
of recently realized just how much I
have posted over the years and how much
of that content still exists today
Facebook for example will remind us of
these memories and you know at best it's
a cute old picture at worst it's a
cringy post from nine years ago
delete I've just been thinking about
this topic a lot recently and I hope
that this video inspires you to reflect
on your own archive of digital content
it's like a time capsule
except it's not buried under the earth
and it's visible to anybody who wants to
find it so in this video I just want to
explore some of my old posts and
profiles and why I think it's important
to clean out and delete a lot of old
posts and then later in this video I'm
going to talk about some of the
potential consequences of old posts
resurfacing in the spirit of Halloween I
want to share a spooky story all of your
interactions your credit card swipes web
searches locations likes they're all
collected in real time into a trillion
dollar a year industry recently I
watched a documentary called the great
hack which explores how Cambridge
analytic I illegally used Facebook data
to essentially create voter profiles of
a bunch of citizens in specific
countries so that they could create
propaganda and sway elections they were
successful in the Trump campaign and the
brexit referendum the reason why Google
and Facebook are the most powerful
companies in the world is because last
year data surpassed oil in value
data is the most valuable asset on earth
if that doesn't terrify you
it should Facebook specifically has so
much data on us like I've had my profile
since 2010 ish do you guys remember when
like becoming a fan of pages was a thing
I remembered there was a time period
where I just kept liking pages anyway I
probably liked hundreds of pages and
from that and other actions Facebook was
able to figure out my basic interests
and things that I liked movies TV shows
people sports teams and of course
Facebook has used that data on me and
everybody else in order to mostly target
ads Facebook also actively encourages
people to make their profile complete
aka tell us where you've lived for how
long the schools that you've gone to
your entire employment history all of
your family members why do we willingly
give them all of this information well
we didn't expect it to be used against
us but our data absolutely is used
against us in a micro and macro sense
but maybe you're one of those people
who's kind of blase about this so like
oh you know all my data I don't really
care use it sell me things we've gotten
very passive in this age honestly so
aside from the massive privacy and data
issues what else is there to be
concerned about
well let's chat about old posts I just
turned 24 thank you and I have had a
really long relationship with social
media
I've been sporadically posting YouTube
videos since I was about 12 years old I
had a myspace which thank God is gone
you know Tom did us all a favor and just
eradicated the entire website and then I
joined Facebook and Twitter I think in
2010 so I have a full decade of social
media posts which of course can be
embarrassing for anyone but I think
specifically for someone around my age
it is even worse because the entire
beginning of that were my awkward
teenage years but I would rather not
have documented but I actually ended up
documenting the entirety of them and
those posts are still online today most
people would probably agree that their
teenage years were rather
saying but previous generations that did
not have the Internet and social media
to the extent that we do all they have
are their memories yearbooks physical
photographs and those can be burned I on
the other hand have an endless
collection of posts and pictures my teen
angst has been available online for far
too long the thing is my parents never
monitored my social media like a lot of
parents did so I could kind of post
whatever I wanted and of course we were
all generally told like be careful what
you post online whatever you post could
stay there forever and we didn't listen
especially because I was a sassy
rebellious teen so as I said I joined
Facebook and Twitter in 2010 and in
nearly ten years how many times have I
tweeted how many times have I posted
commented or liked something on Facebook
in researching and writing this video
I've gotten so overwhelmed every single
time just by the sheer number of posts
it's horrifying
like I still post a fair amount these
days but definitely not not even every
day but back then like say 2012-2013 I
was posting constantly me and my friends
would have full conversations on our
Facebook wall why I don't know so when I
go back and look at these old posts I
mean I just cringe they are just
honestly really dumb and embarrassing to
revisit so in order to compound my shame
I'm going to show you a couple of
examples these are super important must
share with everyone status updates
here's like a low-key Facebook sub tweet
whenever I see your pictures all I think
is you're a demon I can't even remember
who I was referring to being a cat for
Halloween is worse than just writing I
give up on your forehead very sassy oh
wait here's a good one human rights are
greater than economic policies you know
what I like her
2012 me was on
then there were those times where you'd
be like like this for a truth is or like
a reading and I guess I had a hate
rating chocolate milk is the tits
great quality content but I wasn't all
sassy I mean I was very sassy I was also
spreading a lot of love telling people
they have pretty hair happy birthday I
love you hehehe before I decided to
actually go back and look at these posts
I was like really scared at what I might
find and to be honest what I did find
wasn't that bad I mean those are cringy
and embarrassing but like they're not
horrible but still I simply don't want
these posts to exist anymore
and I'm a little bit horrified that
they've lived online for so long all of
those completely unnecessary things have
just been sitting on my profile probably
popping up as memories being sent to all
my Facebook friends that's so
embarrassing why does facebook do that
anyway if you have posted even half as
much as I did over the years you have no
idea what is out there like we are
completely incapable of remembering all
of those thoughtless things that we
posted so I strongly encourage everyone
watching to go through all of your
social media accounts for your own good
later in this video I am gonna touch on
cancel culture because I kind of feel
like it has to be mentioned if we're
talking about the idea of old post
resurfacing being cancelled is probably
everyone's worst nightmare but it's kind
of an extreme consequence but more
likely an old post could harm you
professionally like maybe your colleges
look you up when you're applying or an
employer looks you up find something
that they don't like have you ever
posted any content that could be seen or
interpreted as inappropriate or
unprofessional if you've been online
since you were 14 probably the content
doesn't have to be like canceled
material but if it doesn't reflect you
and your values today why keep it online
delete your old posts and/or profiles
I've personally been on a mission to
delete a lot of the stuff that I have
posted in the past decade at first I
thought oh I'll just go through PO
so you know do a nice little digital
detox still eat some things keep the
rest for memories but I had tweeted
40,000 times I could not possibly go
through that many tweets and manually
delete them nor do I actually want to
reread all of them it's just way way too
much cringe if I thought Facebook was
sassy you got to see 2010 Twitter so I
decided to use a tweet delete er service
and literally just delete my entire feed
that was actually a couple months ago
and now my Twitter feels really fresh
even though I think I'm up to like a
thousand tweets again tweeting up a
storm can't help it but do I miss those
forty thousand tweets absolutely not by
the way some of those tweet delete our
services have an option where you can
automatically have tweets deleted after
a certain amount of time which i think
is really nice I think we should start
thinking of our social media posts as
more temporary than permanent though yes
obviously if something gets posted
online people can screenshot it but I
think it's more so about just like that
periodic cleansing I guess just sounds
nice
like exfoliating your Twitter feed I
guess and then there's Facebook I should
have deleted my facebook a long time ago
to be honest I am ashamed that I've
still been using it why do I use it
mostly to just talk to family but
whatever we have known about their data
issues for a long time and after
watching the great hack I was like okay
it is really too much I have to get rid
of this Facebook simply knows too much
about me and I have like 2000 something
friends on there which is ridiculous I
have 10 years of posts comments and
likes be gone would it be great if you
could just delete like entire years of
posts that'd be so nice but here's the
thing
Facebook and Twitter both do not have
the functionality to mass delete posts
because they don't want us to so if I
can't easily max delete post or delete a
lot of friends and I would rather just
delete the entire profile but weirdly I
feel kind of nostalgic about it like it
makes me kind of sad it's this thing
that's been part of my life for like 10
years but I realized one of the only
things that I would be nostalgic about
with my facebook is my photos so I've
already downloaded all those albums but
another thing is that my facebook is can
acted to other website profiles so
anytime that you've signed up to
something through Facebook if I like
deleted my facebook I wouldn't be able
to access those other websites so I
don't really know what to do about that
it's honestly really amazing how like
tangled these social networks can get in
our lives like they really don't want us
to be able to delete them easily and
they make it a real pain in the ass to
do so and then there's tumblr which I
used to use like obsessively for a
couple of years and I haven't logged in
in a while I was like oh maybe I'll go
through look through my post see if
there's anything I'd want to save or
look back on nope as with all of my
other profiles there's just too much to
look through and I just go burn it burn
it all I mean what am I gonna miss from
tumblr cringe eerie blocks bunch of
pictures of Harry Styles I can find them
elsewhere thank you note to self don't
hoard digital memories just delete it
but yeah overall I am just kind of
amazed and overwhelmed at the amount of
myself that I have shared online over
these years the sheer number of posts
that I've posted looking back now with
hindsight I kind of almost wished that I
could take it all back like undo it like
literally I was [ __ ] posting on Facebook
Twitter Instagram tumblr from the ages
of like 14 to 17 it's a lot definitely
could have toned that down but at the
same time I wouldn't really want to take
it back cuz I guess like that was my way
of like socializing with friends I don't
know
I'm conflicted but the best I can do
currently is my digital detox and from
now on I can be more aware and conscious
of what I'm posting and how often I'm
posting and periodically I think I still
will continue to detox again and again
this is my cleaning motion it actually
feels really like nice and light there's
something very cathartic about just
getting rid of these things feel like
I'm not weighed down by my entire
internet history by the way if you are
on this journey of going through your
digital content don't forget to look
through your friends pages which is a
whole other can of worms because
obviously we've posted things about our
friends they've posted things about us
so if you go through your friends
files and you find anything that you
would like them to delete on your behalf
just let them know hopefully they'll be
fine with doing that the worst is when
other people have posted old photos of
you and the best you can do is untag
yourself I have an old friend who
continues to share photos of us from the
sixth grade and I hate it so much my
friend in high school used to post all
of these extremely embarrassing now and
even kind of embarrassing then things of
herself and me and all of our other
friends and they always pop up in my
memories but she won't delete them
so I untagged myself but it still exists
which is really bothersome that's
another element of this whole thing
that's kind of overwhelming is that like
other people can control posts that
involve you but just the thought of like
something being posted that you
personally can't take down I mean maybe
there are ways that you can ask Facebook
or whatever to delete it but anyway try
to ask nicely and then see what happens
so finally other than old posts being
just unnecessary and embarrassing
there's also a chance that old posts
could ruin your life not to be dramatic
let's talk about canceled culture I
could definitely make an entire
dedicated 30 minute video about this but
I don't want to get into it too deeply
right now I do think it's relevant
though basically I think some people are
canceled for things that they have said
or done recently but often people are
targeted for things that they've posted
online in the past
it's like politicians doing opposition
research on their rivals they'll find
anything that they can to use against
their opponents in that same way our old
online posts can be weaponized against
us on Instagram somebody sent me this
story and I think that it is a good
example of this so I'm going to tell it
really quickly basically there was a guy
at a football game with a sign asking
people to venmo him for beer money
somehow he caught some attention he
ended up raising a lot of money and then
said that he would donate it to a
Children's Hospital wow what a great guy
so the media is reporting on this and
one journalist did some background
research and started digging into his
past and found some old problematic
posts which they ended up publishing
along with the whole piece about him
raising money for the hospital but
people were actually outraged at the
journalists and the media outlet for
publishing this basically they were like
this is a good guy he's trying to donate
money to a good cause why are you trying
to ruin his life over post that he made
when he was 16 and then people dug into
the journalists past and found some
problematic posts too so this situation
obviously got pretty messy but I just
feel like it's a good example of the
fact that none of us who have been
posting online through our immature teen
years are perfect you could probably
find some bad take if you dig deep
enough into someone's social media so
quickly here are my thoughts first I
don't really believe in cancelling
people I absolutely believe that people
need to be held accountable for their
actions and what they have said they
need to acknowledge their mistakes but I
think cancelling has become so
meaningless because it's such a
reactionary response the typical pattern
of cancel culture is like immediately
the mob of the internet will attack a
person threaten them sometimes Doc's
them and I just don't think that that
does any good I definitely do believe
though if say you find something out
about someone and you no longer want to
support them whether it's an artist or
somebody that you know in real life you
have every right to want to cut yourself
off from that person distance yourself
no longer support that person the
problem with being cancelled over old
posts is like really what can a person
do and I would like to hear your
responses if you have any thoughts they
can acknowledge their wrongdoing they
can offer a hopefully sincere apology
but otherwise there's not really much
else they can do they can't take back
what they have said in the past if their
old posts reflect current problematic
actions that's another story but let's
say I think like in most situations
people have actually changed and grown
since whatever old posts and they can
honestly say like I don't even recognize
that person I don't know how I could
have said that thing back then that's
not who I am today
I just really don't think that people
should be fired or lose everything in
their life just because they posted
something ignorant or insensitive in the
past so in these type of situations I've
seen
kind of a pattern of typical apologies
and they go something like this I'm so
sorry this doesn't reflect Who I am
today I was young immature ignorant it
was meant to be an edgy joke things were
different back then and usually people
hate these reasons because they just
sound like excuses but to be honest I
think there is some truth in this
reasoning it does not excuse the past
actions at all
but I do think it is important to look
at these things with context when any of
these old post scandals come up we are
often judging things with a current
mindset we have our 2019 level of locus
so when I was originally writing this
video as I usually do I posted it on
Instagram and asked if anybody had any
stories to share about you know posts
that they've come across on their social
media that surprised them things that
they would be embarrassed about or
ashamed of today and I really appreciate
your honesty as always it's really hard
to admit our mistakes and be honest
about them but in all of these messages
I saw people you know recognizing their
mistakes and them acknowledging how much
they have actually grown as a person
since then and why they know that those
past behaviors were problematic and
wrong and that they wouldn't repeat them
today so here are some examples so I
have a really bad story in the
Netherlands we celebrate sinter Claus
which is a very controversial holiday it
involves a white man kind of like Santa
Claus but his helpers are black men from
Spain yikes as kids you want to be like
the little helpers because they are cute
and super acrobatic so I once dressed up
as a Pete a black little helper of Santa
Claus
this included painting my face black red
lipstick golden earrings it was a really
bad look at the time it was really
common and it still is to dress up as a
Pete although I don't agree with it
anymore the thing is when I was 12 I
posted a photo on Facebook of me with
black face with my costume with the
caption saying the word that starts with
N cancel me now and that story was
really shocking to me for a number of
reasons I wasn't familiar
with this tradition in the Netherlands
but obviously again with a 20-19 mindset
we are so aware today that blackface is
completely unacceptable and racist and
that it has such a horrible history this
situation is even more complex because
it is a holiday tradition but just
because something is a tradition doesn't
mean that it's not racist or problematic
black Piet is a racist caricature it's a
remnant of the Netherlands colonial past
and this tradition is now at the center
of a heated political debate those in
the Netherlands who defend black Piet
argue that it can't be changed because
it's a tradition that's been around
forever beyond Dutch history blackface
originated for the purpose of mocking
and dehumanizing black people in
minstrel shows in the mid to late 1800s
white actors would use black greasepaint
on their faces to depict black people on
stage black Piet no matter how innocent
the Dutch might think him to be
normalizes these portrayals and I've
seen that a lot of people today are
actually protesting against this but
again in this situation this person was
12 years old and yes what they were
doing today we see it as it is it's a
racist tradition saying the word that
starts with N in the caption is just so
bad but again 12 year olds typically are
pretty ignorant like they they don't
know the depth of these things they just
go along with what is seen to be
acceptable in their culture and in
society anyway let's continue I'm a
super lefty feminist now but growing up
I was influenced by my family and was
very religious and right-wing I was
going through my Facebook posts and
found a post from when I was 15 that
compared to robbery
no one should break into your house but
that doesn't mean you don't lock your
doors
I was absolutely disgusted but also
shocked at how much someone can change
in a few years it also reinforces why I
don't post on social media at all
anymore
in 2010 I wore a sexy Pocahontas native
inspired Halloween costume just canceled
me already
I've 10 out of 10 deleted those photos
from my facebook but surely someone else
has some floating around somewhere I
grew up in a conservative Southern
Baptist home and Twitter became a thing
right as
I was starting to figure out myself what
I believed rather than just parroting my
parents I don't even remember exactly
what I posted but I was working through
some ingrained homophobia so I know I
must have posted some bad takes one of
my friends was in a similar position to
me but didn't delete anything and a few
months ago she got harassed online for
weeks because of some ignorantly
homophobic tweet she posted in middle
school it just reminded me how good of a
decision it was for me to delete
everything I mean I'm a gay woman so
being lambasted for my twelve-year-old
selfs homophobia is just
counterproductive
it hurts me more than it's hurt anyone
else to be honest so again if we had
seen any of those actual posts without
context of course they would be shocking
and even sometimes with context they're
still troubling but as I said we often
look back on these things with a 20-19
mindset and also with the mindset of
adults because again a lot of these
things were posted when these people
were young and it's just true that
younger people tend to not be as aware
of these issues
a decade ago things that we today
acknowledge as racist homophobic
misogynistic insensitive were absolutely
still those things back then but in that
culture they may have been seen as more
acceptable generally but anyway I just
want to make it clear that I do not mean
to sound like an apologist for any of
these behaviors obviously if anyone
posted any of those things today they
would be judged much differently it
would not be acceptable but I still
believe that demonizing people for their
mistakes is just not helpful and also I
think it is important to look at every
situation individually with nuance with
context and compare those old posts to
who the person is today because I do
think that people can change a 180
completely different and that should
mean something that growth should mean
something so yes I would still recommend
going through your posts and deleting
them that's not just to protect yourself
from something this blatantly bad coming
out though of course if you do come
across anything that bad I would say you
should delete it some people when
responding to me on Instagram were kind
of concerned about this idea of like
hiding things as
if you're just like burying the past and
not acknowledging it and yes I think
deleting old posts like that is
technically hiding those elements of
your past but I don't think people need
or deserve to be publicly shamed in
order to feel the weight of their past
when you're going back through your old
post it's important to reflect on them
and recognize your growth and maybe
going through your post will make you
realize that there might be some people
in your life that you should reach out
to maybe you acted or spoke in an
inappropriate way to them I got a couple
messages of people saying like I didn't
even realize what I was saying around my
certain friends and now I feel bad about
it I personally don't think that you
know the average person needs to like
post on Facebook and bring everything up
that they have done wrong in the past
but it's about making things right in
the present I don't know it's tough
again let me know what you guys think in
terms of like what can be done after
people have already posted these things
is there any way to be forgiven or move
on like what's the right way to handle
this but also those again were some of
the heavier examples and not everybody
has what again I'm referring to as
canceled material
not everybody has posted like really bad
things online or even said really bad
things so I think we're not all angels
we're not all perfect but yes those were
heavy examples so here are some lighter
examples of things that you might want
to delete for various reasons I'm
forever scared that my One Direction
fanfiction I wrote when I was 16 and
posted to tumblr well one day ruined my
chances of becoming a serious author
it's not even that everything is
cancelled material but I have really
embarrassing stuff online
twelve-year-old me wrote and read cringy
fanfiction and I have no idea what
password I used so I can't delete my
account
loke anxious about it someone help I
just loved that multiple people were
worried about their fanfiction paths so
in closing I just generally believe that
we have the rights to move on from our
past a couple of people mentioned some
things that I wanted to bring up
including the biological gift of
forgetting very generally basically our
brains do us the favor of deleting old
memories and things that it's just
better for us to
and obviously with our digital lives we
don't have that same gift if anything
it's the opposite basically humans have
never before had this much baggage and
like memories before all of this
technology so it is very much a
relatively new thing in terms of human
evolution and it's something that we
have to deal with not only in terms of
society and culturally and within our
relationships and our reputations but
like mentally it is pretty exhausting
and overwhelming to have access to all
of these pieces of memories I also got a
lot of messages of people who find it
hard to look at old posts because
they've gone through really dark times
and they were posting really dark things
and they kind of have to relive that if
they go through their old posts so yeah
often it can be really heavy to just
have those things constantly there too
to keep triggering us to remember
certain things also really quickly I
want to touch on the right to be
forgotten so the right to be forgotten
has been put into practice in the EU and
Argentina the right to be forgotten
reflects the claim of an individual to
have certain data deleted so that third
persons can no longer trace them it has
been defined as the right to silence on
past events and life that are no longer
occurring it leads to allowing
individuals to have information videos
or photographs about themselves deleted
from certain internet records so that
they cannot be found on search engines
some things we want to be forgotten well
that's easier said than done in the
Internet age after some wrangling and
appeals the highest court in the
European Union supported the agency
directors demand saying that Google was
responsible for the processing of
personal data and that people had a
right to erasure or a right to be
forgotten so what's your instinctive
reaction to this maybe you feel a strong
sympathy for decent people who are just
trying to get out from under the shadow
of the World Wide Web who want their
pasts to be private on the other hand do
we want business people handling our
money for example to be able to erase a
prior bankruptcy or a politician to
delete some troubling behavior from the
past so wow that is that I hope you
enjoyed it please let me know your
thoughts down below and if you do end up
through your social media I hope you
enjoy it I hope it's not too much for
you but again I feel good in my decision
to delete a lot of these old things just
because I don't need them to exist
anymore I have to change my relationship
with technology and I guess my digital
footprint anyway that's all stay tuned
for another Internet analysis episode ok
thanks bye
I forgot to say follow me on instagram
for some mediocre pics I've hit 20,000
followers Wow such an arbitrary
milestone also you can follow me on
Twitter for some political tweets that
I'll probably delete soon feel empowered
I'm gonna delete everything I'm gonna
delete this video after it gets posted
no I won't okay that's all bye